Norwegian Football Federation

UEFA A Licence - Final Report

Learning in Football: The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

Vítor Gazimba
January 2016

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
Index
Summary

3

I. Introduction

5

II. On the Road to the Top: The Importance of Practice

7

III. Conceptual Framework

9

IV. Nonlinear Pedagogy

11

V. Manipulation of Constraints and Skill Acquisition

13

Performer Constraints

13

Environmental Constraints

14

Task Constraints

14

Interacting Constraints

15

VI. Repetition without Repetition: The Functional Role of Variability

16

VII. Practice Structure: Task Simplification vs. Task Decomposition

19

Practice Design

20

Small-sided and Conditioned Games

21

Achievement Goal Theory

23

VIII. Augmented Information and Skill Acquisition

24

Internal Focus of Attention vs. External Focus of Attention

24

Frequency of Feedback

26

Demonstration vs. Guided Discovery

29

IX. Conclusions/ Take Home Messages

33

X. References

35

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

2

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
Summary
Based on the dynamical system theory and ecological psychology, in this
report we explore the potential of a nonlinear pedagogical framework and his
effectiveness to teach football. This was a report essentially conceived for
coaches and where we intended to clarify some issues related with the most
efficient way to teach football. The report is divided into 7 different chapters
and is the result of a long revision of scientific literature. The discussions
undertaken throughout the different chapters were always based on scientific
evidence that have been produced in the motor learning area over the last
years. All the report was based in how players learn and in what we coaches
can do in order to promote efficient learning.
During the report we argue that coaches shall consider the development of
motor skills as nonlinear, because variability is part of the learning process
and people/ players learn in a nonlinear way. The nonlinear pedagogy
provides a foundation to explain how game skills might be taught by football
coaches. More specifically, the principles of nonlinear pedagogy inform
coaches about how to structure their practices, and how to deliver instructions
and provide feedback. A nonlinear pedagogy is a teaching method that
involves the manipulation of different types of constraints (performer,
environment, and task constraints) to make emerge the desired behaviour,
and that puts the emphasis on exploratory learning within “gamelike”
situations like small-sided and conditioned games.
According to the nonlinear pedagogy, one of the main tasks of the coaches is
that they need to identify and adjust key task constraints of small-sided and
conditioned games in order to promote the acquisition of specific game skills
or tactical behaviour.
The present report highlights also that, in order to promote efficient learning,
coaches shall: a) structure their practices in accordance with the principles of
task simplification, rather than task decomposition; b) induce with their
instructions and feedback an external focus of attention on their players; c) be
careful with the amount of feedback provided to their players, because it’s
proven that more feedback is not better than less; and d) use guided
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

3

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
discovery as a teaching method, because it presents several advantages
when compared with teaching methods based on the prescription of
behaviours.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

4

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

I. Introduction
The present report is a result of a long revision of scientific literature. The
work produced over the last years by the research groups of the professors
Keith Davids and Duarte Araújo, is the main influence of this report. Among all
the insightful papers published by both groups of research, the paper that
probably more influenced this report, was a paper published by both, Davids
and Araújo, as leading authors and that is entitled “Acquiring Skills in Sport: A
Constraint-Led Perspective”. This report is also inspired in the previous work
of J. J. Gibson, the father of the ecological psychology, and Karl Newell, the
creator of the model of constraints.
Professor Duarte Araújo was my supervisor, while I was doing my PhD in the
Faculty of Human Kinetics, in Lisbon. During the execution of my PhD
program, I had the opportunity to study in depth many of the issues presented
throughout the report, and that is why the revision of literature is so extensive.
In fact, during all the report is made a concrete reference in the text to 69
different studies.
The report is divided into 7 different chapters. We begin the report
emphasizing the importance of practice on the road to achieve excellence in
football. Then, in the chapter 2 we do a brief presentation of the conceptual
framework of the report. The chapters 3 and 4 can be seen as an extension of
the conceptual framework, but each one of them is dedicated to a specific
issue. In that sense, the chapter 3 is dedicated to expose the main features of
the nonlinear pedagogy, and the 4th chapter is centred in the model of
constraints of Newell. In this chapter we will use the model of Newell to
explain how skill acquisition emerge as result of the interaction of different
constraints.
The role of variability is investigated in the chapter 5, as well as the role of
repetition in football practices. The last 2 chapters will provide many important
and concrete practical implications for the coaches. Among other things, in
these 2 chapters, the principles of nonlinear pedagogy will inform the coaches
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

5

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
about how best structure their practices, deliver instructions, provide feedback
and design their practices, in order to promote efficient learning.
The main aim of this report is to answer to the following questions of research:
Main Question: “Is a nonlinear pedagogy an effective method to teach
football?”
Other questions that emerge as a product of the main question. From the
learning point of view:
2) “What is the role of variability in skill acquisition?”
3) “What is the best way to structure the football practice?”
4) “What type of focus of attention shall the coaches induce in their
players?”
5) “Is more feedback better than less?”
6) “Prescription of movements vs. guided discovery, what is the best
method to promote learning?”

All the questions will be answered in accordance with the principles of the
nonlinear pedagogy and based on scientific evidence that has been produced
in the motor learning area, over the last years.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

6

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

II. On the Road to the Top: The Importance of Practice
To achieve excellence in any domain, individuals have to spend a
considerable amount of time trying to improve performance through practicerelated activities (Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Römer, 1993; Howe, Davidson,
& Slaboda, 1998). A significant amount of research has been undertaken in
recent years to identify the important factors underpinning elite sports
performance. This increase in research activity has been particularly evident
in football, where the importance of sports science research and applied work
is now more accepted (Reilly & Williams, 2003).
Players who are offered full-time employment contracts by English Premier
League Academies at the age of 16 years are likely to have devoted more
than 10 years to the sport, investing an average of around 15 hours per week,
700 hours per year, and a total of 7000 hours in specific practice activities
designed to enhance performance (Ward, Hodges, Williams, & Starkes,
2004). By the time a player makes his debut in the Premier League, the
amount of accumulated practice is likely to exceed 10,000 hours.
The crucial point for coaches is that while hereditary factors are likely to play a
role in shaping an individual’s response to practice and training, skills are
highly modifiable and adaptable to training and every player will need to
practise for many hours to develop and refine these skills. For example, the
study of Ward and colleagues (2004) revealed that when compared with subelite players, the elite players spent twice the number of hours per week in
team practice.
The main aim of this section was to emphasize the big amount of time that the
players spend in training activities with the intention to improve their skills and
become top players. Researches who have documented the practice profiles
of elite performers have contributed to our awareness of the significant
investment of time and effort required to reach elite levels of performance.
Therefore, knowing that the training activities are crucial for the development
of players on the road to excellence, and that the players spend a huge
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

7

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
amount of time training, the question now is what can we coaches do to
promote learning in a most efficient way? In order to answer to this question,
during the next chapters we will analyse the literature produced in the motor
control area and we will, based on evidence, clarify what is the most efficient
way to teach football.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

8

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

III. Conceptual Framework
In the last years, the football game (and football teams) has been
characterized has a complex system (Gréhaigne, Bouthier, & David, 1997).
This assumption that the football game is a complex system it seems today
widely accepted by the football community. However to fully understand what
this exactly means, it is important to go deep down in the analysis of the
concept of complexity.
First its important to notice that it doesn’t exist in science, until the present
date, a formal and consensual definition of complexity. What is consensual, is
that in nature a system is considered complex, when is composed by many
component parts that interact in numerous forms (Nicolis & Prigogine, 1989).
In this sense, we have in nature many other examples of complex systems.
An ant colony is one of those examples. The question is then, what are the
common existent points between an ant colony and a football team? All the
different complex systems have some common characteristics: 1) they are
composed by many interacting parts; 2) they exhibit a nonlinear behaviour
(similar system outputs being achieved in different ways); 3) they exhibit
inherent tendencies for self-organization; and 4) the behaviour of the system
is emergent.
The complexity of interactions between individuals in team sports, like
football, makes them a rich context to study nonlinear phenomena such as the
players’ behaviour. In the last 30 years, ideas from scientific paradigms such
as chaos theory and the sciences of complexity have been integrated with
concepts and tools from dynamical systems theory to re-shape our
understanding of movement behaviour (Beek & Meijer, 1988; Davids, Button,
& Bennett, 2003). Dynamical systems theory has been successfully applied to
the study of movement development (Thelen & Smith, 1994; Newell, Liu, &
Mayer-Kress, 2001; Piek, 2002), and skill acquisition (Davids, Button, et al.,
2003; Newell, 1996). Moreover, applications of nonlinear dynamics to the
study of skilled performance and learning, are beginning to provide useful

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

9

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
insights into processes of motor skill acquisition for players and coaches
(Davids, Araújo, Shuttleworth, & Button, 2003).
Based on the dynamical systems theory and ecological psychology, in this
report we will explore the potential of a nonlinear pedagogical framework and
his effectiveness to teach football.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

10

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

IV. Nonlinear Pedagogy
What then is nonlinear pedagogy and why should we consider the
development of motor skills as being nonlinear? Nonlinear pedagogy is
predicated on the concepts and ideas of ecological psychology and dynamical
systems theory and can be defined as the “application of the concepts and
tools of nonlinear dynamics” to teaching and coaching practice (Chow et al.
2006, 72). Coaches shall consider the development of motor skills as
nonlinear, because variability is part of the learning process and people learn
in a nonlinear way. In the words of Milner the development of a skill can be a
process of “moving one step backwards for every two step forwards” (cit. by
Adolph and Berger 2006, 173).
As we saw in the previous chapter, research coming from the motor learning
area has advanced our knowledge about the processes involved in the
acquisition of movement skills (Handford, Davids, Bennett, & Button, 1997;
Magill, 2006; Schmidt & Lee, 2006). In fact, is now taken for granted the need
of use nonlinear models to explain the development of motor skills. Following
this idea, Adolph and Berger (2006) highlighted the complementarity and
compatibility of ideas and methods that exists between the two most
prominent nonlinear models to study skill acquisition, the dynamical system
theory and the ecological psychology. In fact the ideas from dynamical
systems theory have been allied to concepts of ecological psychology
(Gibson, 1979) to understand how movements are coordinated and controlled
in dynamic environments such as sports (Chow et al., 2007).
In summary, nonlinear pedagogy is a learner-centered method to teach sports
(football), because is a method that is based in “how players learn” and not
“how coaches teach”. Nonlinear pedagogy provides a foundation to explain
how game play skills might be taught by sports practitioners (Chow et al.,
2006). More Specifically, nonlinear pedagogy informs the coaches about how
to structure their practices, and how to deliver instructions and provide
feedback (Chow et al., 2006).

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

11

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
As we will see in the next chapters, a nonlinear pedagogy is a teaching
method that involves the manipulation of different types of constraints to make
emerge the desired behaviour, and that puts the emphasis on exploratory
learning within “gamelike” situations like small-sided and conditioned games.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

12

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

V. Manipulation of Constraints and Skill Acquisition
A powerful framework for explaining how nonlinear pedagogy can be used to
develop movement coordination and decision making skills in game play is
captured by the constraints-led perspective with its basis in nonlinear
dynamics (Araújo, Davids, Bennett, Button, & Chapman, 2004; Davids,
Araújo, et al., 2003; Handford et al., 1997). Constraints have been defined as
boundaries or features that shape the emergence of behaviour (Newell, 1986)
and in a nonlinear dynamical interpretation of skill acquisition, constraints are
influential factors within the practice environment. According to Newell (1986),
constraints can be classified into three distinct categories to provide a
coherent framework for understanding how coordination patterns emerge
during task performance. The three categories of constraints are: performer,
environment and task (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Emergence of movement behaviour from the interactions of key
performer, environmental, and task constraints on the learner, as modelled by
Newell (1986).

Performer Constraints
The performer constraints refer to the unique structural and functional
characteristics of learners and include factors related to their physical,
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

13

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
physiological, cognitive and emotional make up. The height, weight and body
composition of an individual, or his motivations, emotions and intentions, are
some concrete examples of performer constraints. In sports, one of the most
important performer constraints is the skill level of a certain individual.
These person-related factors provide affordances (possibilities) for action and
play a significant role in determining the performance style adopted by
individuals. In other words, the fact that the players are all different, because
they all possess different individual characteristics, gives them also different
possibilities for act and solve task problems.

Environmental Constraints
Environmental constraints refer to the surroundings of learners and include
features such as the ambient light, temperature, or altitude. In any movement
task, gravity is a key environmental constraint that influences how movement
coordination may be adjusted. Other environmental constraints are social,
including factors such as peer groups, social norms, and cultural
expectations.

Task Constraints
From the coaches point of view the task constraints are perhaps the most
important category of constraints in developing football skills, since they
include the rules of the game, equipment used, playing areas and markings,
the number of players involved or the goal of a specific training task. One of
the most important task constraints to consider is the information available in
specific performance contexts that learners can use to coordinate their
actions.
It’s crucial for the football coaches understand the need to keep key
information sources and movements coupled together during their practices.
As a pedagogical principle, information-movement coupling certainly mitigates
against traditional approaches of teaching football such as task decomposition
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

14

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
and the isolation of movement skills from game contexts for practice
execution (Davids, Button, & Bennett, 2007). The practical implication of
theses ideas is that the coaches need to make sure that the information
present in the football game is made available also during the training. This
means that, in order to facilitate learning, the coaches shall design training
tasks that are representatives.
Knowing that the football drill is the main tool of the coach to change
behaviour and promote learning, is extremely important that the football
coaches full understand how to manipulate the task constraints in a most
efficient way. The use of small sided and conditioned games is a good way to
maintain the representativeness of the training tasks and avoid the traditional
method of teaching football skills in isolation from the game context.

Interacting Constraints
To summarise, Newell’s (1986) constraints model provides an excellent
conceptualisation to guide nonlinear pedagogical practice because it
adequately captures the rich range of diverse constraints acting on learners
during skills learning in team sports. It’s important to note that each of these
categories of constraints does not act by itself to shape behaviour since
behaviour self-organizes from the interaction of performer, environment and
task constraints. Movement skill acquisition occurs, in that sense, as a
consequence of the interplay of numerous interacting constraints, which need
to be considered in pedagogical practice (Davids, Chow, & Shuttleworth,
2005).
According to this model, the main role of the coach is the identification and
manipulation of the key constraints to facilitate the emergence of functional
movement repertoires. Evidence shows that the manipulation of constraints
by educators/ coaches can lead to the production of successful motor
patterns, decision-making behaviour, and intentions that guide to the
achievement of task goals (Chow et al., 2006).

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

15

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

VI. Repetition without Repetition: The Functional Role of Variability
Movement pattern variability has traditionally been viewed as dysfunctional
and a reflection of “noise” in the central nervous system (Slifkin & Newell,
1998). This vision of variability as something negative that should be avoided,
conducted the cognitive and behaviour sciences to search for motor
invariance, what led to a narrow interpretation of variability in motor
behaviour. From a dynamical systems theoretical perspective, variability in
movement systems is considered to be a central theoretical issue. In recent
years, concepts and tools from dynamical systems theory have been
successfully applied to the study of movement systems, contradicting the
traditional views of variability as noise or error. From this perspective, it is
apparent that variability in movement systems is omnipresent and
unavoidable due to the different constraints that shape each individual’s
behaviour. This new vision of movement variability has important practical
implications for all the areas that are in somehow related with the study of
behaviour. Especially for areas like teaching/ coaching that attempt to
modulate behaviour, these implications are huge. Instead of dysfunctional,
movement variability is now seen as an intrinsic feature of skilled motor
performance that provides the flexibility required to adapt to complex dynamic
sport environments (Williams, Davids, & Williams, 1999).
In resume, variability in motor performance is now seen as functional. This
means that players can seek to achieve skilfulness and develop consistency
of outcomes through movement variability, which emerges from the
interacting constraints of performance. This emergent characteristic of
movement coordination suggests that the existence of a common optimal
motor pattern for performing a skill is a fallacy attributable to the variability
often observed in human motor performance (Brisson & Alain, 1996). Different
players can in that sense, use the great abundance of movement possibilities
offered by the human musculoskeletal apparatus to vary the ways in which
they solve movement problems, and an optimal movement pattern for one
individual may not be optimal for another in relation to a specific task goal.
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

16

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
This ideas contradict many of the traditional approaches to teaching motor
skills predicated on the notion of an idealized, common optimal motor pattern
toward which all learners may aspire (often presented by demonstrations from
an expert model).
As Werner, Thorpe, and Bunker (1996) pointed out, traditional approaches to
teach football were viewed as being technique dominated, following a series
of highly structured practices in which a list of movement skills was
sequentially taught to groups of learners. Such pedagogical approaches have
tended to overemphasize (a) the isolation of movement skills from
performance contexts during practice, (b) task decomposition during learning,
and (c) the role of repetition in skill practices to allow learners to transfer
acquired technical skills into game situations (Rink, 2005).
Although similar movement patterns can be adapted and refined, detailed
analysis of movement kinematics are revealing that the specific movement
patterns used by different individuals to achieve similar outcomes are not the
same (Davids, Shuttleworth, Araújo, & Renshaw, 2003). In fact, individuals
find it extremely challenging to repeat a movement pattern identically across
trials (Davids, Button, & Bennett, 2008). Even though it is important for a
player to consistently repeat a performance outcome during a football match,
the movement pattern used to achieve this outcome may not be repeated in
an identical way every time. This feature of “repetition without repetition”
(Bernstein, 1967) in human movement systems provides learners with the
capacity to invent novel adaptations to solve typical motor problems. As a
matter of fact, research has revealed that expert performers are more
consistent in their performances, and that they achieve that consistency
through more variable ways of performing.
From the learning point of view, the take home message of this chapter is that
coaches shall definitely rethink the role of repetition in their own practices. As
we saw, the use of teaching methods that are based in the teaching of the
“perfect technical skills” is something that doesn’t take into consideration how
people learn. Instead of educate the players for the predictability, through the
use of repetitive technical drills in closed environments, the coaches shall
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

17

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
induce variability in their practices and promote the learning of football skills in
game contexts, where the players can train/ repeat different skills in many
different ways (repetition without repetition). The functional role that variability
assumes in skill acquisition encourages also the use of exploratory learning
methods, because functional movement solutions may be founded through
exploratory behaviour during performance. However, this is not to say that
coaches should simply allow “free play” and hope that the players “solve” the
different game situations in whatever way they deem appropriate. Instead, the
coaches shall be able to manipulate the different task constraints to promote
the emergence of the desired learning outcomes planned for the session. In
other words, the coach shall be able to guide the discovery of the players.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

18

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

VII. Practice Structure: Task Simplification vs. Task Decomposition
An important question for the coaches is how best structure practice for
effective learning. A common belief in sports coaching is that there are
benefits for learners in the strategy of breaking down complex skills. Task
decomposition techniques include, part-task training programmes and
adaptive instruction. Part-task training involves practising some subset of task
components as a precursor to practice or performance of the whole task.
Adaptive training is a technique in which task difficulty is progressively
increased as its performance is mastered. This coaching strategy, where
practice routines start at an easy level and then increase in movement
demands and time pressure, is used in teaching many complex skills in sport.
As we already saw in previous chapters, traditional approaches to teaching
games skills are centred on acquiring relevant movement patterns in isolation
of a game context, before using these skills in adult versions of a particular
game (Turner & Martinek, 1995). In many team games, not only in football,
teaching movement skills by decomposing the task into manageable
components is commonly used with the intention of manage the information
load on learners. However, this traditional approach of task decomposition
may decouple the relevant information–movement coupling so that it becomes
quite challenging for learners to perform the action in game context
(Handford, 2006). An example of task decomposition in football that is often
used by many coaches with the intention of improve the dribble capabilities of
their own players, is the use of training tasks where the players have to
dribble around cones.
Instead, task simplification is a method which allows different components of
complex coordination patterns to be learned in tandem, allowing information
and movements to remain coupled throughout. Task simplification refers to
the process whereby scaled-down versions of tasks are created in practice
with the aim of simplify the process of information pickup by the players
(Davids, Shuttleworth, et al., 2003). The use of modified versions of games,

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

19

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
like small-sided and conditioned games during the football practice is an
example of task simplification.
Literature has provided a significant amount of knowledge about structuring
practices and the provision of learning opportunities (Siedentop & Tannehill,
1999; Metzler, 2000). This applied research has informed teachers and
coaches about the “art” of helping learners acquire game skills. The
implication from these theoretical and empirical findings is that, in order to
promote learning, practice structure should emphasize task simplification
rather than the more traditional technique of task decomposition, because a
decoupling of the demands on the perceptual and motor-systems during
practice prevents learners from developing the cortical neural pathways
underlying perception-for-action (Davids, Araújo, et al., 2003).

Practice Design
As we saw also in the previous chapters, traditional utilization of practice drills
has been criticized because, among other things, they neglect the active role
of the performance environment in shaping movement behaviour and
decision-making (Davids, Araújo, Hristovski, Passos, & Chow, 2012),
sustaining a dysfunctional rupture in the performer-environment relationship.
In that sense, training task design in team sports needs to represent the key
informational variables from a competitive performance environment that
individuals use to regulate actions and make decisions. These findings imply
that coaches need to design dynamic training simulations that capture the
inherent variability of the competitive performance environment, leading
performers to use information that is relevant (Pinder, Renshaw, & Davids,
2009; Pinder, Davids, Renshaw, & Araújo, 2011).
The work of Davids and colleagues (2012) suggest that training needs to be
refocused on the performer-environment relationship. To exemplify, tasks are
often designed for performance without opponents or with passive opposition
to simplify decision-making during repetitive drill practice under conditions of
reduced uncertainty (Passos, Araújo, Davids, & Shuttleworth, 2008).
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

20

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
However, these types of drills, designed to improve physiological or technique
performance, tend to isolate an action from the performance context and may
not allow functional performance behaviours to emerge during interpersonal
interactions of players in more open environments (Passos, Araújo, et al.,
2008).
To summarize, attempting to prepare for team games performance through
repetitive practice of isolated and discrete movement patterns is a reductionist
approach that is only an adequate preparation for producing consistent
movement patterns in closed predictable performance environments.
However, competitive team games are complex, dynamic and unpredictable
environments in which information sources are rarely assured in advance and
emergent actions are highly context dependent (Travassos, Duarte, Vilar,
Araújo, & Davids, 2012; Vilar, Araújo, Davids, & Button, 2012). What means
that training should in that case mainly consist of recreating simulations of the
game by not only, manipulating practice areas (e. g., width and length of
fields) but also the objectives and rules of play (through conditioned games).
Training in small-sided and conditioned games can result in more functional
acquisition of performance behaviours (Davids et al., 2012; Passos, Cordovil,
Fernandes, & Barreiros, 2012; Vilar, Araújo, Davids, & Renshaw, 2010),
because players can learn how to guide their actions according to the
informational specificity of their performance context. The work produced by
Pinder,

Davids,

Renshaw

and

Araújo

(2011)

highlights

this

point

demonstrating that, when participants are required to perform actions under
controlled laboratory conditions, in which possibilities to act differed from his
performance environment, observed patterns of movement coordination
significantly differed.

Small-sided and Conditioned Games
The importance of use small-sided and conditioned games as a training
method in football has been highlighted by many different studies. For
example, in a report related with the use of small-sided and conditioned
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

21

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
games at the Manchester United academy, Fenoglio (2003) showed that by
playing 4 vs. 4 rather than 8 vs. 8 games, players made 135% more passes,
had 260% more scoring attempts and scored 500% more goals. In addition,
the number of 1 vs. 1 encounters between attackers and defenders increased
by 225% while the number of dribbling tricks demonstrated by learners
increased by 280%. The increased frequency of these important sub-phases
of football during practice tasks clearly allows learners greater opportunities to
practice basic skills and to gain more experience of tactical requirements in
game contexts. The advantages of small-sided and conditioned games for
physical conditioning have also been demonstrated. A study conducted by
Impellizzeri and colleagues (2006) found that using small-sided and
conditioned games, compared to interval training for example, resulted in
similar levels of improvement in aerobic fitness and match performance for
junior soccer players.
As Fenoglio (2003) and Davids and colleagues (2013) demonstrated with their
studies, an important strategy to promote skill acquisition and learning in team
games is the use of small-sided and conditioned games. From the learning
point of view, two of the main “strengths” of the small-sided and conditioned
games is that they contain functional levels of contextual variability, and they
amplify information for action by promoting increased frequency of
opportunities for interpersonal interactions to occur. In that sense, small-sided
and conditioned games can be used to help learners gaining experience in
picking up functionally relevant information for continuously regulating
interpersonal interactions with teammates and opponents during performance
(Fenoglio, 2003).
According to the nonlinear pedagogical principles, one of the main tasks of
the coaches is that they need to identify and adjust key task constraints of
small-sided and conditioned games in order to promote the acquisition of
specific game skills or tactical behaviours. Therefore, instead of learners
practicing static drills or playing only in full-sided games, manipulation of
objectives and/ or rules in small-sided and conditioned games made by the
coaches can increase opportunities for common attacking and defensive
subphases to emerge frequently. The structure and organization of smallVÍTOR GAZIMBA

22

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
sided and conditioned games need to be designed by coaches, specifically for
individual learners to practice exploring different performance solutions as
performance environment contexts change, rather than practicing the same
actions repetitively. Following this principles, rather than encouraging learners
to dribble a ball around cones, pass in straight lines to each other, or shoot a
stationary ball in drills, the coaches shall manipulate task constraints of smallsided and conditioned games to encourage adaptive movement behaviours
through facilitating continuous interpersonal interactions of learners with
teammates (Araújo, Davids, & Hristovski, 2006; Passos, Araújo, Davids,
Gouveia et al., 2008; Passos et al., 2009), opponents (Correia et al., 2012),
and key field markings (Esteves et al., 2012).

Achievement Goal Theory
The use of small-sided and conditioned games as a teaching method has also
other advantages such as, increase the amount of time spent in playful and
enjoyable activities by allowing learners to experience simulations of
competitive team games (Davids et al., 2013). In that sense, its important to
note that studies conducted in the domain of the achievement goal theory
have demonstrated that when the goal is to develop an individual’s ability
through learning a task (task mastery), game related practices provide the
relevant opportunities to increase students’ motivation. Such an observation is
based on the report that games provide increase situational interest because
they have structure and outcomes that are meaningful to performance (Griffin,
Brooker, & Patton, 2005). From a psychological and affective perspective,
achievement goal theory provides also a relevant theoretical evidence to
support the efficacy of task simplification methods such as the use of smallsided and conditioned games.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

23

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

VIII. Augmented Information and Skill Acquisition
An important aspect of pedagogical practice its related with the provision of
augmented information to learners. The provision of verbal instructions,
feedback, and the use of demonstrations are examples of augmented
information given by the coaches to the learners with the intention of promote
learning. The delivery of augmented information to the learners has been a
primary concern for motor learning theorists for many years (Newell,
Broderick, Deutsch, & Slifkin, 2003). From a nonlinear pedagogical
perspective, the transmission of verbal instructions and visual demonstrations
during practice are seen as important instructional constraints (Newell, 1986).
The literature produced in this area tells us that an important task for coaches
is to provide learners with feedback so that they can improve performance on
subsequent practice attempts. The provision of feedback helps to promote
efficient learning, ensures correct development of the skills, and influences
the learner’s motivation to persist with practice. However, while learners
require feedback to refine and develop their skills, it is important to realize that
this information can be acquired through many different routes and methods,
not all of which are as effective as each other. In that sense, coaches need to
be aware of how these different sources of feedback work, because this
knowledge is essential so that coaches can determine when and how
augmented information should be provided to best encourage learning.
In the next sections we will analyse several studies produced in the area of
motor learning, and based on evidence we will discuss, if coaches shall with
their instructions induce an internal or an external focus of attention on their
players; if more feedback is better than less; and in the last section of this
chapter we will discuss the role of demonstrations in skill acquisition and the
use of guided discovery as a teaching method.

Internal Focus of Attention vs. External Focus of Attention

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

24

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
Withing and Brinker (1982) proposed that during skill acquisition learners can
be concerned with information about the “image of the act” (focus on
movement dynamics) or the “image of achievement” (focus on the movement
effects to be achieved). This means that during practice, the coach can with
his instructions and feedback direct the attention of the players for internal or
external aspects. In other words, if a coach provides information related with
the “image of the act”, he is inducing an internal focus of attention on the
players. As an example, when the coaches centre their intervention in the
correction/ prescription of technical aspects like “how to position the feet to
perform a long pass” or “how and where to quick the ball”, they are inducing
an internal focus of attention on the players.
In the other hand, if a coach provides information related with the “image of
achievement”, he is inducing an external focus of attention on the players. For
example, if instead of give instructions about how to perform a long pass, the
coach says to the player something like “your task is to perform a long pass
for the chest of your colleague”, then the coach is inducing an external focus
of attention on his player.

Figure 2: Accuracy scores of the experiment 1 conducted by Wulf, McConnel,
Gartner and Schwarz (2002).
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

25

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
The figure 2 was taken from a study conducted by Wulf et al., (2002). In this
study Wulf and colleagues used 4 different groups of learners with identical
tasks. The differences between groups are that, Adv-Ext: group composed by
advanced players that performed the task through the use of an external
focus of attention; Adv-Int: group composed by advanced players that
performed the task through the use of an internal focus of attention; Nov-Ext:
group composed by novice players that performed the task through the use of
an external focus of attention; and Nov-Int: group composed by novice
players that performed the task through the use of an internal focus of
attention.
The results of this study reveals that an external focus that directed
performers’ attention toward the movement effects, yield better learning and
performance of complex skills (see figure 2). They proposed that an external
focus of attention did not distract learners from the movements required but
instead allowed the implicit regulation of task performance and learning.
Davids, Button and Bennett (2004) argued also that the efficiency of the use
of an external focus of attention is related with the fact that this attention focus
doesn’t interfere with self-organization processes of the movement dynamics
as performers explore the task. Instructional constraints that direct a learners
search to movement dynamics (internal focus) may deprive them of the
opportunity to discover and satisfy the multiple task constraints unique to each
individual.
The current research supports also the idea that the use of an external focus
of attention, rather than a prescriptive internal focus of attention, allows
learners to use discovery learning processes during skill acquisition.

Frequency of Feedback
Another important instructional constraint it’s related with the frequency of
feedback to be provided for effective skill learning. Traditionally, coaches have
tended to provide copious amounts of feedback in the belief that ‘‘more is
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

26

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
better’’ for the effective acquisition of football skills. According to the guidance
hypothesis proposed by Salmoni, Schmidt and Walter (1984), providing
augmented feedback on every trial has a beneficial effect on performance but
a detrimental effect on skill learning. Providing feedback on every practice
attempt can lead to an ‘‘overload’’ of information, result in over-reliance on
augmented feedback, and prevent the learner from becoming adequately
involved in the problem-solving process.

Figure 3: Accuracy scores of the experiment 2 conducted by Wulf et al.,
(2002). Meaning of the abbreviations of the different groups:
Ext-100 = external focus induced + feedback provided in 100% of the trials;
Ext-33 = external focus induced + feedback provided in 33% of the trials;
Int-100 = internal focus induced + feedback provided in 100% of the trials;
Int-33 = internal focus induced + feedback provided in 33% of the trials.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

27

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
Wulf and colleagues (2002, experiment 2) studied the effects of the frequency
of feedback in relation with the focus of attention induced (external or internal)
on the learning of a lofted pass in football. These data indicated that receiving
external focus feedback once in every three trials is as functional for learning
as receiving external focus feedback on every trial. The findings highlight
once again the detrimental effect that directing search to movement dynamic
and body parts (internal focus) has on learning and performance in complex
skills.
It seems difficult to determine what is the ideal quantity/ frequency of
feedback that we coaches should provide to the learners. However if we
analyse the figure 3, we understand that the worse thing that a coach can do
is to provide a big amount of feedback while inducing an internal focus of
attention. In other words, the worse thing that a coach can do to promote the
acquisition of skills, is giving a big amount of feedback related with technical
prescriptions of movement. This is a very powerful and important message
that definitely goes against the most traditional ways to teach football.
In resume, it is proven that provide more feedback is not better than provide
less. In that sense, it is crucial for the coaches to achieve the correct balance
between providing feedback often enough to facilitate learning, while at the
same time not providing feedback too frequently so that the learner fails to
become adequately involved in the problem-solving process.
Although a decrement in performance may be observed during practice as a
result of the reduction in feedback frequency, performance is likely to be
enhanced during retention and in competition. Following this idea, we decided
to include in this report a table where are highlighted some methods that may
be employed by the coaches to decrease learners’ reliance on augmented
feedback (see table 1).

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

28

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

Summary Feedback

Bandwidth Feedback

Feedback provided as summary of performance on the
preceding block of practice attempts
Provision of feedback only when performance falls outside
some agreed upon criterion or bandwidth

Descriptive vs.

Provision of descriptive feedback rather than prescriptive

Prescriptive Feedback

guidance encourages learners to find their own solutions
Asking learners to come up with their own solution through a

Question and Answer style

question and answer approach (e.g. “What could you have
done better on that attempt?”

Table 1: Techniques that can be employed by coaches to decrease learners’
reliance on prescriptive feedback (table adapted from Williams & Hodges
2005).

Demonstration vs. Guided Discovery
A demonstration is the most common method used by coaches to convey
information to the players. The main reason for using a demonstration is to
provide the learner with a visual template or criterion model for the desired
movement pattern (Hodges & Franks, 2002; Swinnen, 1996). Coaches use
the demonstrations based in the assumption that a demonstration is essential
to inform players about how best to performer a skill. However, the role and
effectiveness of demonstrations have been examined in the motor learning
literature and as Horn and Williams (2004) pointed out, the use of
demonstrations might not be the most effective method when the aim is to
improve a technical skill. The argument in the basis of this claim is that
demonstrations are overly constraining, forcing the learner to adopt a
movement pattern that may not be the most effective for that individual (i.e. a
‘‘one size fits all’’ assumption).
When the method chosen by the coach to provide information to the players is
based in demonstrations, the coach is directing the attention of players to the
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

29

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
“image of the act”, what means that he is inducing an internal focus of
attention on the players. However as we already saw in the previous sections
of this chapter, the use of instructions that induce an external focus of
attention are more beneficial for learning since it does not constrain the
learner to reproduce an inappropriate movement pattern (Wulf, Lauterbach, &
Toole, 1999; Wulf & Prinz, 2001).
The key issue here is that from the nonlinear pedagogy perspective, there
may be many different ways to achieve the same end result (repetition without
repetition) and learners should be encouraged to explore these opportunities
with the intention to develop flexible and adaptable movement patterns. In that
sense, the widespread acceptance of demonstrations as an essential method
of conveying information to the learner shall be questioned, because although
demonstrations usually facilitate the instruction process, they are not the best
method to promote learning. The most important message for the coaches is
then, that players shall be viewed as active problem-solvers rather than
‘‘empty vessels’’ or passive recipients of information.
A common idea that has been presented along the different chapters of this
report is that teaching methods that are overly prescriptive may be detrimental
to skill acquisition. This idea is also supported by evidence that suggests that
skills taught using such approaches are less resistant to the effects of
psychological stress and more prone to forgetting over time than skills learnt
through guided discovery (Abrams & Reber, 1988; Masters, 1992). Moreover,
while prescriptive instructional approaches are likely to produce faster
performance gains initially, they may result in less efficient and reliable
performance in the long term. The advantages of less prescriptive approaches
such as guided discovery have been advocated by many scientists and
practitioners (Araújo et al., 2004; Davids, Williams, Button, & Court, 2001).
The emphasis when learning by guided discovery is on players finding unique
solutions to movement problems through exploration and discovery. This
approach may be more effective in developing ‘‘smart’’ players who are able
to apply their skills in a variety of performance situations (Williams & Hodges,
2005). As Holyoak (1991) highlighted, teaching through guided discovery
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

30

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
methods conduct the players to “adaptive” expertise, rather than “routine”
expertise.
In resume, the use of guided discovery methods is in accordance with
principles of nonlinear pedagogy. According to a nonlinear way to teach
football, the main task of the coaches is to manipulate constraints (especially
task constraints) in order to make emerge the desired behaviour through
guided discovery and self-exploration, rather than via prescriptive instructions.
It’s important to note that, the use of guided discovery as a teaching method
doesn’t imply that the importance of coaching is diminished, merely that the
coach need to have greater awareness of how shape and guide the behaviour
of his players. In that sense, in the table 2 are presented some concrete
examples of how task constraints may be manipulated in order to make
emerge behaviour through guided discovery and thus promote effective
learning in football.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

31

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

the study conducted by Williams and Hodges (2005).

32

Table 2: Examples of how behaviours can be encouraged during practice by manipulating different constraints. Table taken from

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

IX. Conclusions/ Take Home Messages
This was a report essentially conceived for coaches and where we intended to
clarify some issues related with the most efficient way to teach football. The
discussions undertaken throughout the different chapters of the present report
were always based on scientific evidence that have been produced in the
motor learning area and that form the basis of a nonlinear pedagogy
framework. All the report was based in how players learn and in what we
coaches can do in order to promote efficient learning.
With the aim of make this last section the most clear and accessible possible
for the coaches, we decided to synthesize the conclusions of this report in
brief “take home messages”. In that sense, coaches should know, that:
1) A nonlinear pedagogy is an efficient method to teach football that is
based in how players learn;
2) The principles of nonlinear pedagogy inform the coaches about how
best structure their practices, deliver instructions, provide feedback,
and design their practices, in order to promote effective learning;
3) Nonlinear pedagogy involves the manipulation of different types of
constraints to make emerge the desired behaviour;
4) Movement variability has a functional role in learning, because is an
intrinsic feature of skilled motor performance that provides the flexibility
required to adapt to complex dynamic sport environments;

5) In order to promote learning, the coaches shall structure their practices
in accordance with the principles of task simplification, rather than task
decomposition;

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

33

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
6) The training tasks designed by the coaches need to represent the key
informational variables from a competitive performance environment
that players use to regulate their actions and make decisions;
7) Coaches need to design dynamic training simulations that capture the
inherent variability of the competitive performance environment;
8) Training shall mainly consist in recreating simulations of the game,
through small-sided and conditioned games;
9) Nonlinear pedagogy puts the emphasis on exploratory learning within
small-sided and conditioned games
10) One of the main tasks of the coaches is that they need to identify and
adjust key task constraints of small-sided and conditioned games in
order to promote the acquisition of specific game skills or tactical
behaviours;
11) Coaches shall with their instructions and feedback induce an external
focus of attention on their players;
12) It is proven that more feedback is not better than less;
13) It is crucial for the coaches to achieve the correct balance between
providing feedback often enough to facilitate learning, while at the
same time not providing feedback too frequently so that the learner
fails to become adequately involved in the problem-solving process;
14) Skills learnt through guided discovery are more resistant to the effects
of psychological stress and less prone to forgetting over time;
15) Guided discovery may be a more effective approach in developing
“smart” players, who are able to apply their skills in a variety of
performance situations.
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

34

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition

X. References
Abrams, M., & Reber, A. S. (1988). Implicit learning: Robustness in the face of
psychiatric disorder. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 17(5), 425-39.
Adolph, K. E., & Berger, S. A. (2006). Motor development. In W. Damon & R.
Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Cognition, perception, and
language (pp. 161-213). New York: Wiley.
Araújo, D., Davids, K., Bennett, S., Button, C., & Chapman, G. (2004).
Emergence of sport skills under constraint. In A. M. W. N. J. Hodges (Ed.),
Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory and practice (pp. 409-433).
London: Taylor & Francis.
Araújo, D., Davids, K., & Hristovski, R. (2006). The ecological dynamics of
decision making in sport. Psychology of Sport and Exercise , 7(6), 653-76.
Beek, P. J., & Meijer, O. G. (1988). On the Nature of "the" motor-action
controversy. In O. C. Meijer & K. Roth (Eds.), Complex movement behaviour:
the motor-action controversy (pp. 157-185). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Bernstein, N. (1967). The co-ordination and regulation of movement:
Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press.
Brisson, T. A., & Alain, C. (1996). Should common optimal movement patterns
be identified as the criterion to be achieved?. Journal of Motor Behavior,
28(3), 211-223.
Chow, J. Y., Davids, K., Button, C., Shuttleworth, R., Renshaw, I., & Araújo,
D. (2007). The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Physical Education. Review of
Educational Research, 77(3), 251-278.
Chow, J. Y., Davids, K., Button, C., Shuttleworth, R., Renshaw, I., & Araújo,
D.

(2006).

Nonlinear

Pedagogy:

A

Constraints-Led

Framework

for

Understanding Emergence of Game Play and Movement Skills. Nonlinear
Dynamics, Psychology, and Life Sciences, 10(1), 71-103.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

35

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
Correia, V., Araújo, D., Duarte, R., Travassos, B., Passos, P., & Davids, K.
(2012). Changes in practice task constraints shape decision-making
behaviours of team games players. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport/
Sports Medicine Australia, 15(3), 244-9.
Davids, K., Araújo, D., Correia, V., & Vilar, L. (2013). How small-sided and
conditioned games enhance acquisition of movement and decision-making
skills. Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, 41(3), 154-61.
Davids, K., Araújo, D., Hristovski, R., Passos, P., & Chow, J. Y. (2012).
Ecological dynamics and motor learning design in sport. In A. M. Williams &
N. Hodges (Eds.), Skill Acquisition in Sport: Research, Theory and Practice
(pp. 112-30). London: Routledge.
Davids, K., Araújo, D., Shuttleworth, R., & Button, C. (2003). Acquiring Skill in
Sport: A Constraints-Led Perspective. International Journal of Computer
Science in Sport, 2(2), 31-39.
Davids, K., Button, C., & Bennett, S. (2008). Dynamics of skill acquisition: A
constraints-led approach. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Davids, K., Button, C., & Bennett, S. J. (2007). Acquiring movement skill: A
constraints-led perspective. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Davids, K., Button, C., & Bennett, S. J. (2004). Coordination and Control of
Movement in Sport: An Ecological Approach. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Davids, K., Button, C., & Bennett, S. J. (2003). Coordination and control of
movement in sport: an ecological approach. Champaign: Human Kinetics.
Davids, K., Chow, J. Y., & Shuttleworth, R. (2005). A constraints-led
framework for nonlinear pedagogy in physical education. Journal of Physical
Education New Zealand, 38, 17-29.
Davids, K., Shuttleworth, R., Araújo, D., & Renshaw, I. (2003). Understanding
constraints on physical activity: Implications for motor learning theory. In R.
Arellano & A. Oria (Eds.), Proceedings of Second World Congress on Science

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

36

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
of Physical Activity and Sports (pp. 56-77). Granada, Spain: University of
Granada Press.
Davids, K., Williams, A. M., Button, C., & Court, M. (2001). An integrative
modeling approach to the study of intentional movement behavior. In R. N.
Singer, H. A. Hausenblan, & C. M. Janelle (Eds.), Handbook of sport
psychology (pp. 144-73). New York: Wiley.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of
deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological
Review, 100(3), 363-406.
Esteves, P., Araújo, D., Davids, K., Vilar, L., Travassos, B., & Esteves, C.
(2012). Inter- personal dynamics and relative positioning to scoring target of
performers in 1 vs 1 sub-phases of team sports. Journal of Sports Sciences,
30(12), 1285-93.
Fenoglio, R. (2003). The Manchester United 4 v 4 pilot scheme for U-9’s part
two: The analysis. Insight – FA Coaches’ Association Journal, 21-4.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). An ecological approach to visual perception. Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin.
Gréhaigne, J. F., Bouthier, D., & David, B. (1997). Dynamic-system analysis
of opponent relationshis in collective actions in soccer. Journal of Sports
Sciences, 15, 137-149.
Griffin, L. L., Brooker, R., & Patton, K. (2005). Working towards legitimacy:
Two decades of Teaching Games for Understanding. Physical Education and
Sport Pedagogy, 10(3), 213-223.
Handford, C. H. (2006). Serving up variability and stability. In K. Davids, C.
Button & K. Newell (Eds.), Movement system variability (pp. 73-83).
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Handford, C. H., Davids, K., Bennett, S., & Button, C. (1997). Skill acquisition
in sport: Some applications of an evolving practice ecology. Journal of Sports
Sciences, 15(6), 621-40.
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

37

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
Hodges, N. J., & Franks, I. M. (2002). Modelling coaching practice: The role of
instruction and demonstration. Journal of Sports Sciences, 20(10), 793-811.
Holyoak, K. (1991). Symbolic connectionism: Toward third- generation
theories of expertise. In K. A. Ericsson & J. Smith (Eds.), Toward a general
theory of expertise (pp. 301-36). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Horn, R. R., & Williams, A. M. (2004). Observational learning: Is it time we
took another look?. In A. M. Williams & N. J. Hodges (Eds.), Skill acquisition
in sport: Research, theory and practice (pp. 175-206). London: Routledge.
Howe, M. J. A., Davidson, J. W., & Sloboda, J. A. (1998). Innate talents:
Reality or myth?. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21(3), 399-442.
Impellizzeri, F. M., Marcora, S. M., Castagna, C., Reilly, T., Sassi, A., Iaia, F.
M., & Rampinini, E. (2006). Physiological and performance effects of generic
versus specific aerobic training in soccer players. International Journal of
Sports Medicine, 27(6), 483-92.
Magill, R. A. (2006). Motor learning and control: Concepts and applications
(7th ed.). Boston, MA: McGraw Hill.
Masters, R. S. W. (1992). Knowledge, knerves, and know-how. British Journal
of Psychology, 83, 343-58.
Metzler, M. W. (2000). International models for physical education. Boston,
MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Newell, K. M. (1996). Change in movement and skill: learning, retention and
transfer. In M. L. Latash & M. T. Turvey (Eds.), Dexterity and its development
(pp. 393-430). Mahwah (NJ): Erlbaum.
Newell, K. M. (1986). Constraints on the development of coordination. In M.
G. W. H. T. A. Whiting (Ed.), Motor Development in Children: Aspects of
Coordination and Control (pp. 341-360). Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff.
Newell, K. M., Broderick, M. P., Deutsch, K. M., & Slifkin, A. B. (2003). Task
goals and change in dynamical degrees of freedom with motor learning.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

38

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
29(2), 379–87.
Newell, K. M., Liu, Y. T., & Mayer-Kress, G. (2001). Times scales in motor
learning and development. Psychological Review, 108(1), 57-82.
Nicolis, G., & Prigogine, I. (1989). Exploring Complexity. New York: W.H.
Freeman and Company.
Passos, P., Araújo, D., Davids, K., Gouveia, L., Milho, J., & Serpa, S. (2008).
Information- governing dynamics of attacker-defender interactions in youth
rugby union. Journal of Sports Sciences, 26(13), 1421-9.
Passos, P., Araújo, D., Davids, K., Gouveia, L., Serpa, S., Milho, J., &
Fonseca, S. (2009). Interpersonal pattern dynamics and adaptive behavior in
multiagent neurobiological systems: conceptual model and data. Journal of
Motor Behavior, 41(5), 445-59.
Passos, P., Araújo, D., Davids, K., & Shuttleworth, R. (2008). Manipulating
constraints to train decision making in rugby union. International Journal of
Sports Science and Coaching, 3(1), 125-40.
Passos, P., Cordovil, R., Fernandes, O., & Barreiros, J. (2012). Perceiving
affordances in rugby union. Journal of Sports Science, 30(11), 1175-82.
Piek, J. P. (2002). The Role of variability in early motor development. Infant
Behavior and Development, 25(4), 452-65.
Pinder, R., Davids, K., Renshaw, I., & Araújo, D. (2011). Representative
learning design and functionality of research and practice in sport. Journal of
Sport and Exercise Psychology, 33(1), 146-55.
Pinder, R., Davids, K., Renshaw, I., & Araújo, D. (2011). Manipulating
informational constraints shapes movement reorganization in interceptive
actions. Attention, Perception and Psychophysics, 73(4), 1242-54.
Pinder, R., Renshaw, I., & Davids, K. (2009). Information-movement coupling
in developing cricketers under changing ecological practice constraints.
Human Movement Science, 28(4), 468-79.
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

39

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
Reilly, T., & Williams, A. M. (2003). Science and soccer (2nd ed.). London:
Routledge.
Rink, J. E. (2005). Teaching physical education for learning (5th ed.). Boston:
McGraw-Hill.
Salmoni, A. W., Schmidt, R. A., & Walter, C. B. (1984). Knowledge of results
and motor learning: A review and critical reappraisal. Psychological Bulletin,
95(3), 355-86.
Schmidt, R. A., & Lee, T. D. (2006). Motor learning and control: A behavioural
emphasis (2nd ed.). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Siedentop, D., & Tannehill, D. (1999). Developing teaching skills in physical
education (4th ed.). Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Publishing Company.
Slifkin, A. B., & Newell, K. M. (1998). Is variability in human performance a
reflection of system noise?. American Psychological Society, 7(6), 170-77.
Swinnen, S. P. (1996). Information feedback for motor skill learning: A review.
In H. N. Zelaznik (Eds.), Advances in motor learning and control (pp. 37-66).
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to the
development of cognition and action. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.
Travassos, B., Duarte, R., Viar, L., Araújo, D., & Davids, K. (2012). Practice
task design in team sports: Representativeness enhanced by increasing
opportunities for action. Journal of Sports Science, 30(13), 144-54.
Turner, A., & Martinek, T. J. (1995). Teaching for understanding: A model for
improving decision making during game play. Quest, 47, 44-63.
Vilar, L., Araújo, D., Davids, K., & Button, C. (2012). The Role of Ecological
Dynamics in Analysing Performance in Team Sports. Sports Medicine, 42(1),
1-10.
Vilar, L., Araújo, D., Davids, K., & Renshaw, I. (2012). The need for
‘‘representative task designs’’ in evaluating efficacy of skills tests in sport: a
VÍTOR GAZIMBA

40

The Role of Nonlinear Pedagogy in Skill Acquisition
comment on Russell, Benton and Kingsley (2010). Journal of Sports Science,
30(16), 1727-30.
Ward, P., Hodges, N. J., Williams, A. M., & Starkes, J. L. (2004). Deliberate
practice and expert performance: Defining the path to excellence. In A. M.
Williams & N. J. Hodges (Eds.), Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory
and practice (pp. 231-258). London: Routledge.
Werner, P., Thorpe, R., & Bunker, D. (1996). Teaching games for
understanding: Evolution of a model. The Journal of Physical Education,
Recreation & Dance, 67, 28-33.
Whiting, H. T. A., & Brinker, B. P. L. M. (1982). Image of the act. In J. P. Das,
R. F. Mulcahy & A. E. Wall (Eds.), Theory in research and learning disabilities
(pp. 217-235). NY: Plenum.
Williams, A. M., Davids, K., & Williams, J. G. (1999). Visual perception and
action in sport. London: Routledge.
Williams, A. M., & Hodges, N. J. (2005). Practice, instruction and skill
acquisition in soccer: Challenging tradition. Journal of Sports Sciences, 23(6),
637-50.
Wulf, G., Lauterbach, B., & Toole, T. (1999). Learning advantages of an
external focus of attention in golf. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport,
70(2), 120-6.
Wulf, G., McConnel, N., Gartner, M., & Schwarz, A. (2002). Enhancing the
Learning of Sport Skills Through External-Focus Feedback. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 34(2), 171-182.
Wulf, G., & Prinz, W. (2001). Directing attention to movement effects
enhances learning: A review. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 8(4), 648-60.

VÍTOR GAZIMBA

41

