From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle:
A Study-Map

UEFA-A Lisenskurs 2013/14

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

To you.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

2

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Index

3

A.

Introduction

5

B.

Understanding Football

8

1. Understanding complexity through a systemic vision

8

Classical Paradigm
Organization
System
Simplifying thinking vs. Systemic Modeling

2. Understanding complexity through modeling

11

Complex logic and structure
Fractal organization

3. Applying complexity through the Tactical dimension

13

Supra-dimension
Tactic vs. Strategy

4. Understanding of the Tactical dimension through the Playing Moments

16

“Unbreakable wholeness”
Non-sequential characteristic
Linked and interdependent sub-systems

5. Creating a personal logic of the game through Playing Model

18

From abstract to concrete
Conceptual-methodological pragmatic framework
Reference of associative and cooperative intelligence

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

3

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

C.

Teaching Football

21

6. Teaching the game through Playing Principles

21

Intentionality in structural and functional organization
Somatic Marker Hypothesis (SMH)
Systematic repetition - Subconscious habits
Neurobiological economy

7. Structuring the coaching through Training Principles

25

Methodological Principles
I.

Specificity

II. Dismantlement and hierarchisation of Playing Principles
III. Propensities
IV. Complex progression
V. Horizontally alternating specificity
Phenomenotechnique

8. Coaching the game through Tactical Periodization and its Morphocycles

28

Temporal distribution
(Co)auto-hetero dynamic
Systematic repetition through Morphocycles
Description of different days in Morphocycles
Description of different Morphocycles

D.

E.

Final Thoughts

40

9. Discussion

40

10. Future recommendations

42

References

43

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

4

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

A – Introduction

The aim of this study is to present an idea on how to structure different
training cycles between two matches, taking into account the variety of days
they might comprehend, and the subsequent implications of that variety on the
training process itself. This theme is of an extreme importance in nowadays
football, due to the season calendar being consistently increasing its density in
matches. Therefore, the relevance of this theme is inherent to the coaches’
main tasks and responsibilities which are to, in one hand, further develop the
team, and on the other hand, make sure the players are fresh (physically and,
more importantly, mentally) to compete in the next match. Taking as an
example the Norwegian context, the month of May has specific characteristics
due to the overload of matches. With a clear understanding of different
structures of the training cycles, coaches could have a better impact on the
preparation of their team during that phase. In football literature, these training
cycles are commonly denominated as Morphocycles.
“In biology, morphology is a branch of bioscience dealing with the study
of the form and structure of organisms and their specific structural features."

"In linguistics, morphology is the identification, analysis and description of
the structure of a given language's morphemes, and other linguistic units, or
implied context."
(Wikipedia, 2014)

According to this, the analysis of Morphocycle will be the study of
the form and structure of a training cycle (in-between two matches), as well
as its units (training sessions), and implied context. In order to do so, the
methodology will be to proceed to a scientifical literature review, with the aim of
establishing the links between general theories and the specific context of
football.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

5

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

This analysis it will be divided in two parts, the first elucidating crucial
theories and concepts that help the understanding of the football complexity;
and, the second part, which will focus more in the practical aspects of teaching
and coaching football, but still connecting to the methodological theory.

The first part will begin by demonstrating how complex systems can be
studied and acted upon through a non-simplifying vision. So, the first chapter
will explain how the complexity paradigm allows coaches to view football teams
(and clubs) as organizations and systems. By doing so, the foundations for
breaking down the classical paradigms in training methodology will be set,
providing the possibility to switch into the benefits of complexity, and proceeding
through systemic modeling. For that, the notion of fractals will be explained, for
a correct understanding on a reliable way to break down the complexity inherent
to football. This will be done in chapter two.

After this, the three consecutive chapters will explain how modeling can
be applied in football. Firstly by describing the dimensions that this sport
comprehends, while making clear the nuclear importance of the tactical
dimension for a correct development of the other ones. After that will be shown
how the complexity paradigm also affects the notion of Playing Moments,
demonstrating that the so-called phases of the game are, in fact, linked and
interdependent sub-systems of a higher system: the playing. Following the
clarification of the football dimensions and moments, the last chapter of part one
will explain the value of integrating these notions into a conceptual and
methodological pragmatic framework that aims at reaching the desired playing:
the Playing Model.

The second part of this study, which will relate to the practical aspects of
coaching, will initially explain the influence of establishing playing principles in
order to achieve a structural and functional organization. After that, it will be
suggested how those principles can become automatisms, by creating
subconscious habits in players through somatic markers. Furthermore, in the
following chapter, a description of the training principles will elucidate the
practical issues related to the construction of the training cycles.
Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

6

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

The final chapter of this part will then, through the Tactical Periodization
training conception, recommend different structures of Morphocycles, explaining
the reasoning of prioritizing certain aspects in detriment to others, always in
order to reach the next match in the best conditions possible to maintain high
performance levels. Those different structures will be directly related to the
amount of days available to prepare each match. Furthermore, each day will be
explained according to requirements and limitations, emphasizing on the
predominant sub-dynamic that the session will require.

At the end of this revision, some personal thoughts will be presented,
summarizing the importance and linking of the presented concepts; and then
discussing existent limitations in the current literature, suggesting future areas
of study for a continuous development of the football coaching practice.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

7

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

B – Understanding Football
1.

Understanding complexity through a systemic vision

The “playing” can be studied through a scientific approach
(Resende et al. 1996).

During many years, the common trend in scientific approaches, no matter
the difference in realities, was to quantitatively analyse the various constitutive
parts by separating them. Adding to this, the central idea defended that the
development of the separate parts would improve the total, by mathematical
logic. Nowadays, that logic is, despite true in simplistic quantitative data, losing
its strength to paradigms that base their foundations in inter-disciplinary
approaches, and consequently voting for different development practices.

As Capra (1996) underlined, the crisis of the classical paradigm is
progressively destroying the disciplinary boundaries in which science had
divided reality. Society now faces the abandoning of the mechanical approach,
overtaken by a holistic and ecological one. The knowledge fragmentation in
post-modernity seems to be thematic and not disciplinary, this meaning that all
knowledge is local and total. Consequently, in the intervenient praxis, it is
advised to think globally in order to act locally. The strength of the new knowhow is based in contextualization, inter-disciplinarity and subjectivity.

Moreover, Morin (2007), defending his complexity paradigm, assures that
the simplifying thinking is unable to conceive the conjunction of the one and
the multiple (unitat multiplex). Either it abstractly unifies by erasing the diversity
or, on the opposite end, overlays the diversity without conceiving the unity.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

8

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

In accordance with these authors, it is easily understandable that the
football game is something more than the dimensions acting together, which
makes it incorrect to separate them. Instead, they should be reduced while not
impoverished, respecting it as a whole. The game is a whole, but consisted of
parts (the principles; and dimensions – tactical, psychological, technical,
physical and strategical). The fracturing of these parts must be pragmatically
achieved in order to develop the playing, not allowing its impoverishing by
subjugating the parts to a sense – the desired playing (Gaiteiro, 2006).

Looking at the football game, a football club, or even team, through the
perspective of an organization, which Bertrand & Guillement (1994, cit in.
Guilherme Oliveira, 2004) define as a “system situated in an environment and
comprehends: a cultural subsystem (intentions, aims, values and convictions), a
techno-cognitive

subsystem

(knowledge,

techniques,

technologies

and

experience), a psychosocial subsystem (people linked through relations) as well
as a management subsystem (planification, control and coordination)”, Morin’s
unitat multiplex need is clearly present through the enunciation of subsystems
inherent to the system itself, which in his turn is surrounded by its specific
environment.

Adding to this idea, Tamarit (2007) defends that a football team, the
game, and the playing that it produces, can be considered as open systems,
adaptive and homeostatic, due to the high level of interaction with the context,
as well as its capacity to adapt to it. Moreover, he underlies that, because
football teams live internally in a permanent switching between order and
disorder, with the aim to structurally adjust themselves to the necessity of each
moment, they can be considered as homeostatic systems. In the figure below,
an example of an open system diagram is depicted. More important than the
variables enounced in it – which vary in accordance to the reality being studied
–, the vital part is the observation of the existing links between all of them
(internal climate), and also its openness to the external environment, which
influences it and is influenced by it.
Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

9

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Figure 1: Open System Diagram

In line with the above mentioned authors, Cunha e Silva (1999, cit in.
Gaiteiro, 2006) states that a complex system is a system which cannot be
characterized by the reunion of the characteristics and qualities of its
constitutive parts, and its behavior cannot be predicted through its components.

Taking this into account, both the football game and a football team can
be understandable as organizations, and categorized as open complex
systems. Consequently, being complex phenomena, in order to act upon them
the most profitable way, Garganta & Gréhaigne (1999) defend that systemic
modeling is the key, due to this process being considered: (1) interactive,
because its constitutive players act in a reciprocity relationship; (2) global or
total, because the value of the teams can be higher or lower than the sum of the
value of its players; (3) complex, due to the profusion of relations between the
different elements; (4) organized, because its structure and functionality are set
through relations of cooperation and opposition, established within the respect
of principles and rules and according to aims and objectives.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

10

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

2.

Understanding complexity through modeling

Narrowing our focus of attention to the game itself, the aim of this chapter
is to understand the possibilities to model a game which, at first sight, seems
complex, chaotic, random, and disorganized. In reality, further look will
unmistakably demonstrate that these characteristics are correct. Taking this into
account, how will it be possible to understand it? How will it be possible to
model in a first instance, and subsequently act on it in an efficient way?

Firstly, it is necessary to understand the intrinsic characteristics of these
associated concepts, always relating them to the football game. Garganta &
Gréhaigne (1999) affirm that the football game lies in a complex logic, not only
due to the number of variables in play, but also due to the unpredictability and
randomness of the situations that the players and the teams face. According to
the same authors, the nature of the football game comprehends a complex
structure due to (a) the extension of relations between players, (b) the fact that
the game’s actions do not follow a predictable and sequential order, having a
high degree of indeterminism, (c) the presence of systems that undergo quick
changes, with numerous and diverse components.

Moreover, Guilherme Oliveira (2008) underpins that chaotic systems
(football teams) are characterized by an amount of interacting agents (players,
coaches, etc.), which cooperate, with common and coordinated aims and
behaviors, creating a certain order (playing model – individual and collective
patterns of action) and stability in a chaotic context of disorder and permanent
instability. Consequently, the football game is a confrontation between two
chaotic and deterministic systems with a fractal organization.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

11

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

In order to understand this definition of the game, it is vital to have a clear
notion of what a fractal is, and what it means when associated to the football
game.

Figure 2: Fractal

As defined, a Fractal is the propriety of fracturing and representing a
chaotic model in sub-models, existing in different scales, and which are
representative of that model (Mandelbrot, 1991, cit in. Guilherme Oliveira,
2008). This meaning that it is a constant or regular part of a chaotic system
which, by its structure and functionality, manages to represent the whole, no
matter the scale in consideration. (Resende et al. 2006).

Starting from this definition, and establishing a parallel to the football
game, looking at the fractal represented in Figure 2, it is possible to imagine this
pyramid representing either (1) the Playing Dimensions, or (2) the Playing
Moments:
1 – Each side representing each dimension (technical, physical,
psychological, and strategical), and the whole pyramid being the Tactical
Dimension, constituted by all interlinked dimensions, at all times present no
matter the dimension that is being looked at (Chapter 3);
2 – Each side representing each moment (established attack, established
defence, offensive transition, and defensive transition), and the whole pyramid
being the Game, in which all moments are present in each side (Chapter 4);
It is these two examples together, that provide a starting perception of
the modeling opportunities and, nevertheless, the required praxis in football.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

12

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

3.

Applying complexity through the Tactical dimension

Tactic is the set of behaviors that Mourinho wants for the team, desiring their
manifestation with regularity in competition, i.e., the set of principles that
embody his Playing Model. It is a specific behavioral culture that requires
learning. It is, thus, an emergent propriety.
(Resende et al. 2006)
The tactical dimension as culture is what allows identifying teams, this
being, the organization that teams show regularly is what evidences an identity.
(Resende et al. 2006).

As seen in the first example of the fractal above, the inseparability of the
dimensions becomes an established factor, since the identity of the whole – the
playing – results from the established connections between them (Maciel,
2008). However, not all dimensions possess the same hierarchy, due to the
impact they have on the team’s performance. As Guilherme Oliveira (2004)
explains, all type of action and interaction that the player(s) execute during the
game must be subordinated to the Tactical Dimension. This is the dimension
that gives sense and unifies the game. The expression of the team and player
dynamics is based in an intentionality driven by tactical needs. The tactical aim
is selected as causal element of the behavior, central part of the making of the
future.

Conceiving the tactical dimension as a Supra-dimension, it coordinates
the entire training process, giving sense to the game and its playing. The
tactical dimension results from the interaction of all other dimensions (technical,
physical, psychological and strategical), while giving sense to them, since it
provides an intention prior to the decision-making.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

13

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

As supra-dimension, it is a categorical aim and a referential which
appears from the existence of the process, an intentional emergency. It has to
work as a reflection and action guide, central element, and not as a residue or
performance sub-product. Due to this, it also requires a methodological
foundation that does not misrepresent the competitive specificities.

Figure 3: The Playing and its Dimensions

As shown in Figure 3, the tactical dimension conditions the physical,
technical, and psychological dimension, developing them as a consequence of
the operationalization of a playing. Accordingly, it is not methodologically
coherent to undertake technical or physical training exercises without being
under a tactical framework, due to the need for each technical action to be
based on intentionality – a tactical need –, and each “physical load” needing to
be associated with a Central Nervous System fatigue, achievable under
decision-making processes, which are present in tactical situations. Under such
framework, the players will develop the recognizing of a tactical sense in each
behavior, understanding the significances of the tactical actions occurring
during the game, the aim. This need makes players undergo through more than
simple perceptions. They will be able to interpret motor behavior, giving it a
sense in a higher context – collectively shared –, understanding the whole. The
Playing Model (see Chapter 5) works then as an agglutinating and coordinating
force, promoting self-organization (Gaiteiro, 2006)

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

14

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

However, as a note, it is crucial to underline the difference between
tactic and strategy, with the latter one being match-specific adaptations, and
always subordinated to the first one – the team’s behavioral culture. The
strategy determines that slight adaptations to the opponents’ playing system
might occur, however, while with the ball, the own playing system should be
priority.

As interfering as the strategical side might be, it can never become the
fundamental attractor. If doing so, the regular modification would destroy all
efforts in order to establish a behavioral regularity, by the constant modification
of habits, automatisms, references, mental images, cognitive processes, action
schemes, communication between parts, regulating principles, somatic
markers, all of these indispensable in the setting and performing of a playing
culture (Gaiteiro, 2006). These notions will be further explained in the second
part of this work which focuses on the practical aspects of teaching the football
game.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

15

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

4.

Understanding of the Tactical dimension through the Playing Moments
“Only an understanding of the Game by its “Whole” accepts an
approach that doesn’t remove from the “playing” its nature, this
meaning its “unbreakable wholeness””.
Carvalhal (2007)

Following the explanation of the figure representing a fractal, the second
example was related to the Playing Moments. In order to understand its fractal
characteristic, the differentiation between moments and phases must be
explained. Guilherme Oliveira (2004), about this difference in terminology
between Playing Phases and Playing Moments, explains that phases have a
sequential characteristic, one happening after another one (see Figure 4
below). The author considers that the game has four moments, which do not
occur in a sequentially pattern, presenting themselves randomly instead.

Moreover, Amieiro (2007) explains that all these moments are linked to
each other, and cannot be looked at in a closed-frame way. Furthermore, the
moments of the game are interdependent and related to each other, with the
attack and the defense not being separable, not only due to belonging to a
whole, but also due to each one conditioning the other (Sanz, 2010).

Figure 4: Playing Phases

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

16

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Figure 5: Playing Moments

In the figures above, the difference between terminologies is depicted,
contrasting the sequential pattern, on the top, with the playing having four
different and separate phases, with their own principles; and, below, four
playing moments that are linked and interdependent, sharing moments in time
and having principles that go hand-in-hand.

In accordance with this model, Moreno (2010), using a systemic thinking,
suggests that the moments of the game have to be seen as subsystems
inside a superior system, in this case the football game, therefore being all
related to each other, not being separable from its totality, because the
fragmentation of the parts of a system doesn’t only separate them, but also
eliminates their proprieties.

The respecting of these characteristics allows the coaches a correct
definition of the principles and moments to be set in the Playing Model and,
consequently, a truthful background for the practice, i.e. training methodology.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

17

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

5.

Creating a personal logic of the game through the Playing Model

“To conceive a model is to allow the conceiving of the complexity’s intelligibility.
If conceiving is organizing, organization is the nuclear concept of complexity.”
(Faria, 1999)

According to Le Moigne (1990), a model can be considered a simplified
representation of reality, and it is related to constructive processes, which are
linked to knowledge conceptions of a certain phenomenon or reality. Linking this
to the coaches’ responsibility, the conceptual matrix deriving from the coach’s
ideas intends to give life to the desired playing, by modeling it. It is therefore the
transforming of abstract ideas into a concrete model.

More specifically, the necessity of a Playing Model is explained by
organizational learning in meanings: 1. because it is impossible to act in a
coherent way without the existence of an aim in a distant future. 2. Because
future exists, despite being imprecise and obscure seen from the present, being
clearer to understand along the way, allowing the thorough designing of the
path. 3. Because it allows players to learn beforehand, before being obliged to
act, having an agglutinating effect on the individual and collective actions
(Gaiteiro, 2006).

However, as the same author proceeds, no set of predictions or visions
can contain, in its operational detail, sufficient information about the actions to
undertake in the present, but might have something to say in relation to the
general traits. Despite the game’s ambiguity, it is possible to identify
probabilistic links and be active upon the future, requiring thus a playing
conception and, consequently a Playing Model.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

18

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Linking these notions to the concepts presented in the previous chapters,
Guilherme Oliveira (2008) introduces the Playing Model as a playing idea,
constituted by principles (and its sub-parts) which represent the different playing
moments that are interlinked, creating an own functional and structural
organization, i.e., an identity. Being a Model, it always presents itself as a
conjecture, always being open to individual and collective additions, thus always
in construction and evolution, with an unattainable final aim.

This unattainable final aim derives from the model being a constant
dialogue between the coaches’ intentions and the context variables. A model
cannot be a rigid structure, uniquely imposing repetitive mechanical behaviors.
Successful systems work in unbalanced states, this meaning that they have
enough flexibility to manage change and deviant behaviors as, for example,
players’ creativity.
Accordingly, the Playing Model is constituted by a highly complex net,
formed by the interaction of innumerous aspects such as the coach’s ideas –
the desired playing; the training methodology (principles and matrix); his
leadership and sensibility; his group management;…–, and the context
variables – the country’s culture, the club’s culture, board aims, board members’
characteristics, players’ characteristics (in relation to the game, beliefs, history,
personality, etc.), the fans, the press, among others (Tamarit 2013, cit in. Tobar
2013).

Figure 6: Playing Model

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

19

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

In relation to its operationalization, to create a Playing Model, the coach
has to have a clear idea of which behaviors/principles he would like his team to
have in the different Playing Moments. After the setting of principles and
moments, it is through the day-to-day practice, that the process will shape
desired behaviors and intentions. As explained by Capra (1996), the
construction of new knowledge must result from the permanent dialectic
between the intervenient practice and the theoretical referential that frames it.
Objectively, what is required is a coherent concept-methodology. The neural
patterns that the players build through the external object – the game –, and the
neural patterns reconstructed inside their brains through the memory – these
ones built through the game situation, visual presentations, demonstration,
explanations and interventions –, must go hand in hand, being this achieved
through specificity (Gaiteiro, 2006). Consequently, the coaches’ actions during
the process should all be linked to the priority principles to be taught in a certain
moment.

To work under a framework of a Playing Model is to work with a
reference, a desire to be attained; hence the need to build the present in
accordance to what is projected (Frade, 1985, cit in. Tobar, 2013). “The aspired
future will condition the present” being a never-finished process, “where the
playing idea – the future – determines the rise of a functionality, and
functionality only becomes it, if in the way it originated a structure”. It’s in the
process of transforming ideas into a regular functionality, that a methodological
matrix for modeling will be key.
As a conclusion, Gaiteiro (2006) underlines that the model doesn’t only
describe in a methodic and systematic way the relations’ system (collective)
which are established between the different elements (individuals), in a certain
game situation. It is fundamentally an action promoter, which describes and
defines

situations,

behaviors,

positions,

tasks,

responsibilities

and

competencies, allowing the acquisition of an associative and cooperative
intelligence, through the selective and contextual dominance of dynamic
attractors (playing principles and sub-principes).

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

20

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

C – Teaching Football

6.

Teaching the game through Playing Principles

“The aim will always be the same: create cerebral the behavioral dynamic
which is organization, philosophy, and emotion. Create intentions and habits.
Make conscious and later on subconscious, a set of principles in order to
naturally enhance a way of playing.”
Faria (2006)

Educating is habituating the brain to command the body. Football is a
know-how which is acquired through experiencing, and promotes knowledge
about the know-how, the understanding of the action, establishing a certain
relation between the mind and the habit. Only the intentional action is educative
(Castelo, 1996). In order to establish this link between the mind and the habit,
the player’s actions must be compared to their intentions, which can be
previously set through the Playing Principles. These, defined as “intentionality
patterns related to the playing, which sustain the criteria expressed by the
different scales of the team (individual, groupal, sectorial, intersectorial, and
collective), and being regularly present in the game – in the Playing Moments –
will provide it an identity and functionality” (Maciel, 2011).

Consequently, having set the Playing Principles, the coach needs then to
transfer them from the conscious level to the subconscious, creating habits,
making players naturally behave in accordance to the playing. This is done
through exploiting the somatic markers’ influence on players’ decisions.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

21

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

“Somatic Markers are a special case of the use of feelings created by
secondary emotions. These emotions and feelings were connected, through
learning, to predicted future results according to certain scenarios. When a
negative somatic marker is linked to a certain future result, the combination
works as an alarm bell. On the opposite end, when it’s a positive somatic
marker which is linked, the result becomes an incentive.” (Damásio, 1996) In
other words, the internal system of preferences is inherently predisposed to
avoid pain and search for pleasure. This is shown in the diagram below where,
if training exercises are coherently structured, if a player’s action goes in
accordance to the playing model, he will be successful, therefore establishing a
positive somatic marker which will influence his next decision in that way, even
if that decision is subconscious.

Figure 7: Creation of Somatic Markers

During the matches, players are asked to decide quickly and many times
in a subconscious manner. The decision-making happens under the control of
an internal system of preferences, and under the influence of a set of external
circumstances. Consequently, through training, the coach must create
situations where the players’ decisions go in accordance to his playing, but also
making them feel that those decisions were their own. This is done by changing
their internal preferences, designing exercises where players reach more often
success when deciding according his playing. In order to do so, coaches have a
useful tool which is the Propensities Training Principle (see Chapter 7).

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

22

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Taking this into account, the acquisition of certain intended interactions
by the players requires exercising, in order to emotionally qualify the responses,
which will then enhance certain decisions and eliminate others. But that
necessitates the happening of the intended interactions, i.e., the playing
principles. (Gomes, 2008)

Having understood how to positively use somatic markers, it is important
to realize the advantages of creating these subconscious habits. “Habit is a
learned mental action which can be done without thinking or conscious
supervising. It is also called fixed action pattern, or automatism” (McCrone,
2002) Additionally, the habit or the automatism result from knowledge, i.e.,
mental images which have been created by experiences, some conscious and
other subconscious, which have been stored in memory, and will be used to
quickly decide and react to certain situations. (Damásio, 2000, cit. in Resende
et al. 2006)

But the crucial part is how this is linked with the players’ behaviors on the
pitch. And, in fact, the acquiring of a playing with a previous intention only
occurs through action – repetitive intentional action. It is a habit acquired
through action. The systematic undergoing to the Tactical Periodization training
by the players allows to create habits and automatisms related to a playing,
helping them to take and execute decisions in a faster way, in the heat of the
(inter)action, counteracting the natural slowness of the brain. The habit requires
the creation of somatic markers, which help the body to decide faster,
influencing in accordance to the desired playing (Tobar, 2013).

As clarified in the graph below, through systematic repetition of the
decision-making processes, if the player decides in accordance to the desired
playing, creating positive somatic markers, the level of consciousness required
for the next similar decision will be lower, decreasing its total amount of time
needed.
Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

23

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Figure 8: Creation of Habits

As McCrone (2002) emphasizes, “It is an intelligent trick to save time,
which works when the brain experiences the same situation enough times, to
achieve a connection as a habit”. Furthermore, Casarin & Greboggy (2012) say
that, not like trivial decisions, complex ones demand a higher set of
interdependent dimensions. When these are not habituated (automatized),
much effort is required, leading to a state of fatigue (Central Nervous System).
This is shown in the graph through the third axis, on the right. In other words,
coaches should pursue this “neurobiological economy” – with the habit
making the complex cortex-body-action triad to be put aside, reducing the
neurobiological effort –, in order for players to have a fresher brain, which will
increase their creativity levels, since they will have more energy for creating
solutions of higher complexity. Thus, players stop spending their attention in
elementary aspects, directing their focus to more dynamic ones, as the
managing of the here and now – how to materialize an idea in a certain
moment, under certain circumstances. The players manage successfully the
moments, in accordance to the Playing Principles, as a result of the habituation
acquired during the training process, where somatic markers were established.
Concluding, it is vital for the training process to be specific, not only to
create somatic markers related to a playing, but also to make the previous
intentions (playing idea), which are conscious, be intentions in the act, which
most of the times appear through a subconscious pattern, in order to optimize
the decisional processes (Tobar, 2013).

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

24

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

7.

Structuring the coaching through Training Principles

“I don’t see any other possibility than the systematic repetition in Specificity of
the Playing Principles, because it is fundamental to understand that
organization is success, and the more organized the team will be, the higher the
probability of success.”
(Faria, 2008)

The Playing Principles (and their sub-parts), and their interaction in the
different Playing Moments, is what is needed to be trained, through the different
scales (collective, intersectorial, sectorial, groupal, and individual), revealing a
fractal organization in its development (Guilherme Oliveira, 2009, cit. in Tobar,
2013). Therefore, no matter the scale to be developed, it needs to be
representative of the wholeness. Following this globality concept, the playing
idea, in conjunction with the matrix of methodological principles, will allow the
existence of a coherence and a logic in the guiding of the whole training
process. This matrix comprehends:

1.

The Specificity “Supra-Principle” – is the constructing of

exercising contexts, during the training sessions, which derive from and report
to the playing idea, the playing that is intended to be developed with the
players, but without putting aside the respect of the Tactical Periodization’s
training principles. The Specificity contextualizes everything that is done
(Guilherme Oliveira, 2010, cit. in Tobar, 2013). Moreover, Specificity should not
be considered a methodological principle, but a categorical imperative instead.
It is a necessity to beacon things, to direct the process, and to guide this
direction (Frade, cit. in Tobar, 2013).
“Specificity lies in a concept of globality which comprehends the relation
whole-parts, contextualized in an Organization” (Gomes, 2008).

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

25

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

2.

Dismantlement and Hierarchisation of Playing Principles – it is

a methodological principle related to de-structuring of the playing principles into
the different sub-parts, moments, and organization levels that the team can
assume. In doing so, coaches create a teaching and learning logic in
accordance to the playing.
3.

Propensities Principle – allows chaos to be deterministic, since it

refers to the modeling of the exercising contexts, with the intention to create
contexts that relate to a playing, increasing the occurrences of the desired
behaviors (Maciel, 2011). This principle prioritarily relates to the systematic
repetition of the desired concepts at a certain moment, them being tactical
(through the Playing Principles), technical (any desired execution), and physical
(predominance of any type of muscular contraction; predominance of any
metabolic mechanism).
4.

Principle of Complex Progression – it relates to the choice and

management of what is priority to be trained in a certain moment, taking into
account the Playing Model, the intentions for the next game, and the
occurrences in the previous game. Moreover, it demonstrates that the acquiring
of the playing does not occur in a linear fashion, but in a complex way instead,
since it is developed according to a playing idea. During the process, it is
necessary to progress from low to high complexity, but always within a
complexity framework. This is evidenced during both the season and the
training session, however having to be managed through the Morphocycle in a
non-linear fashion.
5.

Principle of Horizontally Alternating Specificity – it refers to the

invariable preoccupation of operationalizing a playing idea, though the scale in
which this is achieved is diverse. Through the week, different scales of the
playing are distributed, alternating the type of muscular contraction which is
predominant, the complexity of the exercises, and the intensity in which they are
undertaken, in order to manage a correct effort-recovery balance, protecting the
involved structures. It is denominated as horizontal, due to this alternation being
done along the week, from day to day, and not within a training session – which
would be vertical (Tobar, 2013).

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

26

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

The methodological principles, despite being possible to conceptualize
separately, cannot be understood in this way, and especially not operationalized
in such manner. On the contrary, being looked at in this way they lose sense,
since the logical operationalization of the playing emerges from a pattern of
connections between the methodological principles. Only through these
connections it is possible to structure the systematic repetition of the pattern
Morphocycle (see Chapter 8).

Nevertheless, as described by Frade (2003), this operationalization
cannot

be

purely

academic,

and

requires

a

good

level

of

“phenomenotechnique” by the coach, which relates to the coach sensibility to
drive the training process, this meaning the defining of the path that will
transform the abstract (ideas about Playing Model) into concrete (training and
game, its own). This phenomenology emphasizes the pragmatic side of the
training process, due to the existence of a difference between the
being/intervening and the pure scientific academism.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

27

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

8.

Coaching the game through Tactical Periodization and its Morphocycles

“There is the traditional training, analytical; there is the integrated training,
which is the one with the ball, but where the fundamental preoccupations are
not that different from the traditional training; and there is my way of training,
which you can call Tactical Periodization, which has nothing to do with the other
two – despite many thinking so.
The only difference between the traditional and the integrated training is that, in
the last one, the players are “fooled” by giving them the ball. But the
consequences of the training are exactly the same as the traditional training.
(…) If a player never met Tactical Periodization and worked all his life in the
traditional way, he won’t feel the need of what he ignores… they’ll give him that
sort of integrated and he will like it. (…) Nobody misses what they ignore.”
Mourinho (cit in. Gaiteiro, 2006)

Tactical Periodization is a training conception with own methodological
principles, following a different logic, which is centered in a teaching-learning
process, having the main aim the acquisition of a specific playing. The creation
and acquisition of this playing requires time, thus the necessity of temporally
distribute its acquisition. This is done through the season, in general terms,
and through the Morphocycle, in structural and operational terms (Tobar, 2013).
As the same author describes, this training conception privileges a
particular playing order (Playing Model), embodied by specific principles and
sub-principles, which articulate themselves in a coherent manner along the
different moments, always respecting the specificity principle of the subject
(system/players) and the object (the playing). According to Maciel (2011), “it
follows the systemic thinking and, consequently, it has an emphasis on the
relations, the quality and the patterns, without refuting in its evolution the
intuition”.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

28

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

For these relations, the aim is to create a fusion between the pretension
(previous intention) and the occurrence (intention in action) between all players
of a certain group. Gomes (cit in. Tobar, 2013) adds that, to develop a playing,
its ideas, it is necessary to recognize that football is a collective game,
constituted of individualities that relate to each other, and make emerge a
dynamic as a functional whole. This means, it also needs the acceptance that
the coach models human beings in interaction. The Tactical Periodization
demands the person to be respected as human being, i.e. and intelligent being,
sensible, adaptable, and capable of doing it among others. In order to do so, the
coaching needs to be done in a dialectic way, maximizing the players’
interventions in the decisions of which direction to go. Summarizing the
relational aspect, Resende et al. (2006) explain that ”the evolutionary dynamic
resultant from the training through this model is (co)auto-hetero. Auto because
individual changes occur. Hetero, because the playing principles fundamentally
contemplate relations between several individuals. Thus, the individual
progresses, but subjected to a logic that has to do with the coexistence and
growth of the others, in a common framework which relates to a playing
conception. Therefore, the (co).”

In practical terms, the operationalization of the Tactical Periodization
aims at performance stabilization at a high level, which will be possible to reach
through the respect of a week pattern, the Morphocycle pattern, in opposition to
the week and cycle variations commonly seen. The operationalizing logic of the
playing arises through the connecting of the methodological principles (training
principles), which create a process matrix embodied as the Morphocycle,
which represents the playing morphology distributed in-between two matches.
Each cycle is similar to the previous and next one, in relation to its form, and
must be understood through its fractal organization, since it must be assumed
as a methodological regularity (core of the training process). Its systematic
repetition allows the team and the players to acquire relevant aspects of the
playing, without risking their recovery. It promotes a high dynamic of
occurrences which maximizes the performance levels, as well as keeping the
players in competitive shape along all weeks of the season (Tobar, 2013).
Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

29

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Here below will now be shortly described the different Morphocycles,
according to the amount of days in-between each match – from the normal sixdays pattern, until the two-days cycle. In order to do so, firstly the color code
represented on the diagrams needs to be recognized, for a correct
understanding of its meaning. Consequently, in the figure below is shown the
type of sub-dynamics in the muscular contractions that players will endure
during matches (duration, tension, and speed). Therefore, these types of
muscular demands should be present in different days of the preparation, to
allow their development, but always as predominant sub-dynamic, and never
taken out of their specific context.

Figure 9: Colour Codes of Physical Sub-dynamics (Correia, 2013)

Secondly, each day of the six-day Morphocycle, and its main
characteristics, will be summarized to allow an understanding of the reasoning
behind the selection of days to “sacrifice” in shorter cycles.

Figure 10: Six-days’ Morphocycle

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

30

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

1st Day after the match:

Despite the consensus about the physiological importance of training the
day after the competition, due to the advantages on removing acid lactic and
other sub-products from the muscle metabolism, as well as increasing the
process of bringing oxygen to the cells, and bettering blood flow (Tobar, 2013),
this view is only related to one dimension, in this case, the physical one.

Considering the player a human being, a “psycho-biologic” identity
(Maciel, 2011), the magnitude of the mental/emotional fatigue cannot be
overlooked. Due to this type of fatigue requiring more recovery time, and due to
the limited concentration levels and emotional predisposal that players evidence
the day after competition (among other psycho-social variables), it is suggested,
in six-days Morphocycles, to have day-off on the first day.

“(…) The best way to recover, in relation to the mental aspects, (…) has
nothing to do with theory, but the coaches’ sensibility to understand the team’s
needs (…). Your emotional state allows a better global recovery.” (Faria, 2007,
cit. in Tobar, 2013)

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

31

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

2nd Day after the match:

Figure 11: Recovery Sub-dynamic

According to Tactical Periodization, the way to train is always related to
the playing, whether it is in the acquisition or the restitution period.
Consequently, this day is categorized as light-green, since it is the mixture of
the green (match colour) and the white (day off).

“During recovery, players need predominantly to have an effort that is
identical to the match, in relation to concentric and eccentric muscular
contractions, changes of directions, jumps, passes, pressures, ball circulation,
in order to have actions identical to the match in technical, tactical and
physiological terms. (…) Simply to activate the organism the same way it’s
activated in the match, but with much intermittence, many breaks…” (Guilherme
Oliveira, 2010, cit in. Tobar, 2013)

The stimulus’s must be short and of “high” intensity, using predominantly
the alactic anaerobic metabolism, and providing large resting periods in order
for the aerobic metabolism to proceed with the regeneration, reorganization and
refeeding of the organism. (Maciel, 2011)

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

32

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

3rd Day after the match:

Figure 12: Tension Sub-dynamic

Since on this day the totality of the team is still not recovered (due to
some players needing more time, especially on the mental aspect), the aim of
this session is to start working on the playing, but without jeopardizing the
session of the fourth day, which is the one where there is the certainty of having
a totally recovered team, and consequently the best moment to train with the
highest complexity level (bigger structures). Therefore, in order to work on the
playing while allowing players to fully recover, the intention will be to practice
the sub-principles (and their sub-parts) through intermittent fractions of the
game, i.e. medium-sized structures (ca. 3v3 to 6v6). In relation to the muscular
contraction prevalence, the work should be done under the dominance of the
tension of contraction, thus the exercises should promote high amounts of
football-specific actions (accelerations, changes of direction, shots, etc.). In
order to promote that, the exercises should be done with reduced sizes, number
of players, and times. “Besides the articulating of the different playing principles,
it is also necessary to put together the sub-principles of each bigger principle.
As an example, if I define ball possession as a principle, it is not enough to
overuse it in an 8v8 exercise. That would be too reductive, since under that ball
possession there are sub-principles to be worked on. What we do is to take
those sub-principles, like possession with zone-transition or avoiding pass to
first station, and potentiate them in very reduced spaces and with fewer amount
of players. Then, in a context with higher amount of players and larger spaces
we articulate those sub-principles.” (Mourinho, cit. in Tobar, 2013)

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

33

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

4th Day after the match:

Figure 13: Duration Sub-dynamic

In this day, due to the team being fully recovered, the complexity level
should be high, allowing the training of the main principles in bigger structures
(amount of players). Since the organization level comprehends to globality of
the playing, the characterizing of this day assumes the color green, resulting
from the adding of the other two days of the acquisition period, blue and yellow.
However, it is important to notice that the green of this training is not the same
green of the match day, since the demands of a training session will never
equal the demands of the match.
It is also the best opportunity to work with the strategical details that the
next opponent might demand. Physically, it should be similar to the competitive
demands, with large spaces, and a dominance of the duration of the muscular
contraction, thus larger times of the exercises. However, even if this day
requires more continuity, it should still be in a discontinuity framework, i.e. with
regular breaks, due to this being the intrinsic logic of the football game, and to
allow the maintaining of high concentration levels, as well as the technical
proficiency. Basically, it is the density level of the session (time in play vs. time
in rest) that should be high.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

34

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

5th day after the match (two days before next match):

Figure 14: Speed Sub-dynamic

The density in this session should be low, but not as low as the third day,
since in that day players were still recovering from the previous match.
However, this should be the day with the lowest mental-emotional and also
physical effort. This is due to the necessity of protecting the mental and physical
freshness for the next match, two days later. Consequently, the exercises
should be of very low structures, aiming at the acquisition of sub-principles (and
their sub-parts).

However, it is a session of the acquisition period, with its dominant trait
the speed, this including not only the execution, but also the information
analysis – decision-making –, i.e. a speed contextualized in the playing. “What
needs to dominate in this training are the situations of high speed of execution
and decision, therefore the necessity of avoiding everything that can create
noise. The priority in this training is to have dominant demands on the motor
cortex in relation to what is done with spontaneity, what is habit.” (Maciel, 2011)

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

35

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

6th Day after match (day before next match):

Figure 15: Activation Recovery Sub-dynamic

The day before the match the main aim is to develop the predisposal to
competition, in order for players to reach the match in the best way possible. In
order to pre-activate players for competition, the exercises should be of very low
complexity level, executed at high speed, short periods of time and large
breaks. This is easily understandable through the color code, which is a mixture
between the day before (yellow – speed sub-dynamic) and the day-off (white),
originating the light-yellow code.

During this day, the situations that can be trained should be of very low
complexity level in order to have no demands on the concentration. This can be
achieved through exercises that require solutions which are already
automatized by the players. Adding to this, if required, some strategical aspects
about next match can be mentioned, however going through them with no
associated competitiveness.
After the describing of each day, it is now possible to think about the
variety of Morphocycles that coaches have to face, due to the inherent
characteristics of the season calendar that comprehend different competitions.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

36

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Five days’ Morphocycle:

Figure 16: Five-days' Morphocycle

Taking into account that the session of the fourth day (in a six-days
cycle) is the one that is more similar to the match, it is common sense that the
subsequent load to the players is also the heaviest of the week. By load not
only the physical demands are considered. Due to that session having the
highest levels of complexity – interlink of main principles, strategical
adaptations, and bigger structures in relation to number of players – it is the one
that requires more emotional and cognitive effort, thus originating higher fatigue
to the Central Nervous System. Moreover, due to the physical sub-dynamic
being predominantly related to the duration of the muscular contractions, also in
the physical dimension it generates higher levels of fatigue.

Given that in a five days’ cycle there will be no time to mentally and
physically recover from that session, due to only having one more day prior to
next match, this should then be the session that is removed from the pattern
Morphocycle. As described above, the priority will always be to ensure the
mental and physical freshness of the players in the next match.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

37

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Four days’ Morphocycle:

Figure 17: Four-days' Morphocycle

In a four days’ cycle, the same thinking process has to apply: the priority
is firstly to recover from the previous match. Therefore, since from the three
acquisition sessions (in a six-days’ cycle) the only one that allows the continuity
of the recovery process from last match is the tension sub-dynamic, this should
be the one to prioritize in such cycle, that only comprehends one acquisition
day. Any other solution would, either put at risk the freshness for next game – if
deciding for another sub-dynamic – or, not allowing the further development of
the playing – if opting for another recovery session.

However, it is crucial to note that in Tactical Periodization no suggestions
should be considered as recipes, due to the importance of the coach’s
sensibility to understand what the team requires in each specific moment. For
example, in a four days’ cycle, as depicted above, the coach could perfectly
decide to give one more day-off after the match, or add on more recovery
session instead of having an acquisition day. The suggestions are always
considering the further development of the playing, but not always the team is
mentally ready for it.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

38

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Three and two days’ Morphocycles:

Figure 18: Three-days' Morphocycle

In cycles where there is no possibility to include any acquisition day, the
main aim will again be to fully recover the team in all aspects. In these
circumstances, coaches shouldn’t be afraid to only promote recovery sessions,
or to include sessions that aim at the predisposal for competition. According to
Maciel (2011), competitive moments with high density of matches are extremely
tiring, not only in bioenergetical terms, but also because matches promote high
acquisition levels themselves. As a result, matches work already as tool for the
development of the playing, having the sessions only to fully recover for them.

It is important here to remember that, in Tactical Periodization, the
pattern of Morphocycles should start directly in the pre-season (very early –
second to third week), this meaning that, until the season reaches competitive
moments of high density in matches, the team already has had an amount of
cycles to acquire the playing, thus being already very comfortable in their own
Playing Model.

Figure 19: Two-days’ Morphocycle (two variations)

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

39

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

D – Final Thoughts

9.

Discussion

This work intended to establish a study-map for football practitioners and,
in particular, coaches. However, due to its fundamental mission being the
presentation of an approach which contradicts the prevalent variety of practices,
all readers that are keen in critically analyze how to develop the process, can
investigate more on a philosophy that aims at respecting the reality of football.
Consequently, instead of a thorough explanation of certain theories, this text
needed to be structured reaching a large array of themes, explaining how they
are linked between each other and, most importantly, how they are intrinsically
connected to football. In doing so, the reader would possess a self-educating
tool which would allow him to firstly form his opinion on the value of the
complexity paradigm for understanding and teaching football, and secondly to
study those concepts in a more detailed way.

This study-map was then divided in two parts, with the first bringing a
perspective on how to theoretically perceive football and, more concretely,
football matches; and the second part, more focused on the training process
itself, aimed at elucidating the necessary principles associated to the
development of a team and, furthermore, how to interlink those principles in a
pragmatic framework.

Accordingly, it started by confronting the classical paradigm with the
complex thinking, underlining the value of looking at teams as open and
complex systems. In doing so, the notion of fractal was explained in order to act
upon those systems without impoverishing the reality and its consequent endproduct. This would be done through systemic modeling of the playing, i.e., the
desired behaviors during the football matches. Inevitably, that led up to a
representation of the dimensions and the playing moments: (a) the first
illustrating

how the

technical,

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

physical,

psychological,

and

strategical
40

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

dimensions only made sense under a tactical framework, due to each one of
them requiring a predetermined intention to be correctly analyzed and
developed. The tactical was then considered a supra-dimension, due to unifying
all others, and providing a sense to each behavior, promoting a collective
intelligence; (b) through this unifying characteristic of the tactical dimension, the
playing moments were then exhibited as linked and interdependent, with a nonsequential pattern, opposing to the concept of playing “phases”. In the last
segment of part one, the notion of Playing Model was clarified, by highlighting
the value of systematically model the above mentioned moments, in order for
the coach’s abstract ideas being converted into a concrete framework for
players.

In the part of this assignment that followed, dedicated to the training
process, the first aim was to enlighten how the concrete notions of the playing
model would create an intentional, structural and functional organization, by the
playing principles. More practically, it was explained how, through training, and
creation of positive somatic markers, those principles would become
subconscious habits, increasing creativity levels by neurobiological economy.
Subsequently, to achieve this, the framework needed to follow training
principles that would maximize those automatisms. Therefore, here were
explained the five most important ones: specificity, dismantlement and
hierarchisation of playing principles, propensities, complex progression, and
horizontally alternating specificity. Nevertheless, such concepts cannot be used
in an incoherent manner, requiring to be temporally distributed through the
training cycles in-between each matches. As a result, several distributions were
presented, according to the number of days a cycle could assume. Five
different morphocycles were suggested, discussing the methodological priorities
to allow the team to be fully prepared for the subsequent match. Moreover,
each day of the morphocycle was explained through the importance of the
required complexity level and predominant physical sub-dynamic associated to
it.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

41

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

10. Future recommendations

By doing this revision of the literature on Tactical Periodization, it was
clearly noticeable that, despite its integrated approach and consideration of a
supra-dimension that is tactical, the presented periodizations themselves are
based upon physical sub-dynamics – which, being totally fair, are “tacticallyphysical” –, and not “tactically-strategical” with a physical sub-dynamic under it,
as they should be. In order to reach this knowledge level, which would in
practical terms, i.e. on the training periodization itself, relocate the tactical
dimension as the higher force, there are two vital themes to be looked upon: (a)
knowledge on hierarchies in playing principles; and (b), information on playing
principles’ periodization.

(a) There is a clear need for coaches’ development in game
understanding, to know and comprehend which playing principles
experienced coaches define for their playing moments. Moreover, the
detailing of those into sub-principles (and their sub-parts), and their
hierarchisation by significance, would be an extremely valuable tool
for further development.

(b) Adding to this, the existence of studies that explain how experienced
coaches temporally distribute that hierarchy of playing principles
through the season, in order to reach faster learning and
development rates, would bring a pedagogical and methodological
debate which would have a tremendous impact on the game itself,
and its intelligibility.

However, these limitations in the literature are a normal consequence of
the (still) few practitioners that follow a systematic and complex approach to the
team and player development process. This work intended at gathering a few
more…

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

42

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

E – References

Amieiro, N. (2007): Defesa à Zona no Futebol – Um pretexto para reflectir sobre
o “jogar”…bem, ganhando! Visão e Contextos. Lisboa, Portugal.
Capra, F. (1996): A teia da vida. Uma nova compreensão científica dos
sistemas vivos. Editora Cultrix, São Paulo.
Carvalhal, C. (2007): Prefácio in Amieiro, N.: Defesa à Zona no Futebol – Um
pretexto para reflectir sobre o “jogar”... bem, ganhando! (p. 11). Visão e
Contextos. Lisboa, Portugal.
Casarin, R.V. & Greboggy, D.L. (2012): A Fadiga do Hábito e o Hábito da
Fadiga. Available at:
http://www.universidadedofutebol.com.br/Artigo/15190/A%2bFADIGA%2b
DO%2bHABITO%2bE%2bO%2bHABITO%2bDA%2bFADIGA%2b.
Castelo, J. (1996): Futebol – a organização de jogo. Edições FMH, Lisboa.
Correia, R. (2013): Tactical Periodization. Presentation at Cupfinale Seminaret,
Norway, 22nd November 2013.
Damásio, A. (1996): O Erro de Descartes. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras.
Faria, R. (1999): “Periodização Táctica” Um Imperativo Conceptometodológico
do

Rendimento

Superior em

Futebol.

Undergraduate

dissertation

presented at Faculdade de Ciências do Desporto e de Educação Física da
Universidade do Porto. Portugal.
Faria, R. (2006): Introduction in Resende et al.: Mourinho – Porquê tantas
vitórias? (p. 17). Editora Gradiva. Lisboa.
Faria, R. (2008): Interview in: Campos, C.: A justificação da Periodização
Táctica

como

uma

fenomenotécnica

–

“A

singularidade

da

INTERVENÇÂO DO TREINADOR como a sua impressão digital”. MC
Sports. Espanha.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

43

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

Frade, V. (2003): Interview in Martins, F.: A Periodização Táctica segundo Vítor
Frade. Mais que um conceito, uma forma de estar e reflectir o Futebol.
Monography presented at FCDEF-UP.
Gaiteiro, B. (2006): A ciência oculta do sucesso! Mourinho aos olhos da ciência.
Monography presented at Universidade do Porto – Faculdade de
Desporto. Porto.
Garganta, J. & Gréhaigne, J. F. (1999): Abordagem sistêmica do jogo de
futebol: moda ou necessidade? Revista Movimento, Porto Alegre, Ano V,
Nº 10, p. 40-50.
Gomes, M. S. (2008): O desenvolvimento do jogar segundo a Periodização
Táctica. MC Sports. Espanha.
Guilherme

Oliveira,

J.

(2004):

Conhecimento

Específico

em

Futebol.

Contributos para a definição de uma matriz dinâmica do processo de
ensino-aprendizagem/treino do jogo. Master’s dissertation presented at
Faculdade de Ciências do Desporto e de Educação Física da
Universidade do Porto. Portugal.
Guilherme Oliveira, J. (2008): O Processo de Construção de um Modelo de
Jogo de uma Equipa de Futebol. Documento Orientador, Sessão Teórica.
Curso de Treinadores – Nível 1 da Associação de Futebol do Porto.
Póvoa de Varzim. Portugal.
Le Moigne, J. (1990): La modélisation des systèmes complexes. Dunod. Paris.
Maciel, J. (2008): A (In)(Corpo)r(Acção) precoce dum jogar de Qualidade como
Necessidade (ECO)ANTROPOSOCIALTOTAL – Futebol, um Fenómeno
AntropoSocialTotal, que “primeiro se estranha e depois se entranha” e…
logo, logo, ganha-se! Undergraduate dissertation presented at Faculdade
de Desporto da Universidade do Porto, Portugal.
Maciel, J. (2011): Interview in Esteves, L.: Metodologia, Treino e Ideias sobre
Futebol. Porto Alegre.

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

44

From Complexity Paradigm to Morphocycle: a Study-Map

McCrone, J. (2002): Como o cérebro funciona. 2ª edição. São Paulo:
Publifolha.
Moreno, O. P. C. (2010): El Modelo de Juego del FC Barcelona – Una red de
significado interpretada desde el paradigma de la complejidad. MC Sports.
España.
Morin, E. (2007): Introdução ao pensamento complexo. Porto Alegre: Sulina –
3ª edição.
Resende, N., Oliveira, B., Barreto, R. & Amieiro, N. (2006): Mourinho: Porquê
tantas vitórias? Gradiva.
Sanz, C. (2010): Prefacio in Conde M.: Transición Ataque-Defensa – Pautas
Táctico-Emocionales (p.11). MC Sports. España.
Tamarit, X. (2007): Qué és La Periodización Táctica? Vivenciar el juego para
condicionar el juego. MC Sports. España.
Tobar, J.B. (2013): Periodización Tática: Explorando sua Organização
Concepto-Metodológica. Monography presented at Universidade Federal
do Rio Grande do Sul – Escola de Educação Física. Porto Alegre.
Wikipedia, Morphology, biology: Available at:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morphology_(biology).
Wikipedia, Morphology, linguistics: Available at:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morphology_(linguistics).

Luís Berkemeier Pimenta

45

