Z' -X ^<
/^</^

Skills and

Strategies
for
>
'J J

4/
^

.

v

Co£^4^hing

Soccer

m
an nar&reaves

7>^^^c/

^y^'
//
r

Skillfi^

and

Strategie^i^

for

Coaching
Soccer
Alan Hargreaves, MEd

6"
Leisure Press
Champaign, Illinois

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Hargreaves, Alan, 1933Skills and strategies for coaching soccer / by Alan Hargreaves.

p.

cm.

ISBN 0-88011-328-6
1.

Soccer—Coaching.

GV943.8.H37

I.

Title.

1990

796.334'07'7~dc20

89-35783

CIP
ISBN: 0-88011-328-6
Copyright © 1990 by Alan Hargreaves
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utiliza-

tion of this work in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other

means, now known or hereafter invented, including xerography, photocopying and recording, and in any information retrieval system, is forbidden
without the written permission of the publisher.
Developmental Editor: June I. Decker, PhD
Assistant Editor: Timothy Ryan, Robert King
Copyeditor: Julie Anderson
Proofreader: Dianna Matlosz

Production Director: Ernie Noa
Typesetter: Brad Colson
Text Design: Keith Blomberg
Text Layout: Kimberlie Henris
Cover Design: Jack Davis
Cover Photo: Will Zehr
Illustrations: Tim Birkin, John Hartshorn,

9

David Hassall, and Elizabeth Salt

Graphic Services: Tim Offenstein and Kimberlie Henris
Printer: Versa Press
Printed in the United States of America
10

987654321

Leisure Press

A Division of Human Kinetics Publishers, Inc.
Box 5076, Champaign, IL 61825-5076
1-800-747-4457

To my wife, Janet.

Digitized by the Internet Arcinive
in

2010

http://www.archive.org/details/skillsstrategiesOOharg

CONTENTS
Preface

IX

Acknowledgments

xi

PART

I

PREPARING TO COACH

Chapter 1

1

Ethics and Coaching Philosophy

Soccer as a Lifetime Sport

3

3

The Meaning and Importance of Good Play 4
What Is Your Philosophy? 5
A Soccer Code of Ethics 6

Chapter 2

Individual Coaching Strategies

Coaching Follows Observation

Good Diagnosis

9

10

Coach the Players, Not the Drill

10

Progressive Practices

10
Good Communication 11

Chapter 3 Group Coaching Strategies
Good Organization 15
The Grid System of Coaching 16
Good Selection Within Groups 18
Getting the Group Started 19
Keeping Momentum in Your Lesson 19
Accommodating Different Rates of Progress
Planning Your Coaching Session 20

15

20

vi

Contents

PART

II

SKILLS AND TECHNIQUES

Chapter 4

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

Basic Techniques
Ball Juggling

Chapter 5

23
25

25

45

Coaching Passing

Basic Techniques of Short Passing

51
51

Basic Techniques of Long Passing

60
Coaching the Mind of the Passer 63
Coaching the Mind of the Receiver 66

Chapter 6

Passing Games

The Enjoyment Factor 11
Controlling Your Practices

78

Games for Beginners 78
Games for Intermediates 80
Games for Advanced Players
Larger Game Situations

Chapter 7

77

83

85

Coaching Dribbling

Coaching Beginners 91
Coaching Intermediates 97
The Transition from Intermediate to Advanced
Coaching Advanced Dribbling 103

Chapter 8

91

100

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

117

The First Defender 118
The Second Defender 132
The Basic Tackles 137

Chapter 9

Coaching Kicking

149

Teaching Beginners 149
The Instep Drive 151
The Long, Lofted Kick 155

The Volley 157
The Chip 159
The Swerve or Banana Kick

Chapter 10

162

Coaching Shooting

Where to Shoot 167
Drills for Beginners

168

Drills for Intermediates

170

Drills for Advanced Players

Shooting Games

179

175

167

Contents

Chapter 11

Coaching Heading

Drills for Beginners

185

Attacking Heading

189

Drills for Advanced Players

Defensive Heading

Chapter 12

vii

185

191

193

Coaching Goalkeeping

Selecting Your Goalkeepers

199

199

Goalkeeper Safety 200
Goalkeeper Warm-Ups 200
Dealing With Shots—The Basic Techniques 203
Goalkeeping Drills 205
Diving and Punching Saves 207
Dealing With Crosses 212
Diving at the Feet of an Attacker 215
Narrowing the Angle and Judging Angles 218
223

Distributing the Ball

Chapter 13

Coaching the Throw-In

227

The Basic Action 227
The Long Throw 230
Tactics in Attack
Tactics in Defense

232
241

TACTICS AND TEAMWORK
Chapter 14 Understanding Team Play

PART

III

The Three Common Concepts 247
Common Concepts of Attack and Defense

Chapter 15

247

251

Team Formations and Systems of Play

Development of Systems of Play

245

261

261

Basic Components of Modern Systems

265

Four Modern Systems of Play 267
Variations of the Basic Systems 272
Selecting a System

275

Individual Duties and Responsibilities

Chapter 16

275

Tactics at Corners and Free Kicks

The Short Corner 279
The Long Corner 282
Defense at Corners

286

The Attacking Free Kick

287
Defense of Free Kicks 293
Coaching Set Plays 296

279

—
viii

Contents

Chapter 17

Coaching Tactics and Teamwork

Methods

297

What Do I Coach? 297
Where Do I Coach? 298

How Do

I

Coach?

Chapter 18

298

Coaching Tactics and Teamwork

— Practice

Situations

305

Attack Versus Defense Practices

305

Shadow Soccer 307
Positional Practices for Individuals

Good Decision Making

309

313

PART IV TEAM MANAGEMENT
Chapter 19

315

Physical and Mental Preparation for

Games
Physical Preparation

Mental Preparation

Chapter 20

317

317
322

Handling Problem Players

Prevention, Not Cure

The Ball Hog 328
The Violent Player 329
The Timid or Frightened Player
The Dictator 333
The Poor Tactician 334
Dropping a Player 336

Chapter 21

327

327

331

«

Fitness for Soccer

Five Strategies for Fitness Training

Cardiorespiratory Fitness
Speed 352

339
339

340

Pressure Training 356
SkUl Circuits 357

Glossary

359

About the Author

365

Preface
This is meant to be a friendly book, in which I have endeavored to share
with readers some of the approaches, ideas, and methods I have found
useful during many years of experience. The book is particularly designed
to help men and

women coaching youth soccer teams, and college and

university students who intend to specialize in soccer coaching. For most
of my professional life I have conducted courses and clinics for exactly

such audiences; I have coached players ranging from 5-year-olds in
California to seasoned professionals in the English League.
Few books start with the beginner and then provide, in a progressive
sequence, practices suitable for professional players. Also, few if any
books on soccer coaching invite the reader to consider a coaching style
that is not only practical but also philosophical. This style combines a
concern for the dignity of the individual with a love for the manner in
which the game is played. Experience has proven this style to be effective in producing winning teams.
Readers of this book, whatever their experience, will find something
of value to share and to use in their teaching of soccer.

Acknowledgments
In England, thanks go to the following:

Allen Wade, former Director of Coaching of the Football Association,
for reading the manuscript and for permission to reproduce his original

work on the principles of play; Kevin Verity, Football Association Regional
Coach and coauthor of an earlier college publication; Charles Hughes,
Assistant National Coach of the Football Association, for his many publications and for his influence on English coaching; Basil Ashford (Staffordshire Polytechnic) and Dennis WUshaw (formerly of Wolverhampton
Wanderers Football Club of England) for advice on sports and educational
psychology; Bill Fiarvey for help with the development of systems of play;
and Tony Waddington (Stoke City Football Club) and Ernie Tagg (Crewe

Alexandra Football Club) for giving me the opportunity to enter professional league soccer.

For the illustrations and artwork I thank Tim Birkin (Project Advertising,
Stoke), John Hartshorn, David Hassall, and Elizabeth Salt; photographer

Richard Biedrycki; David Thompson and players from Sneyd High School;
and Eric Hassall, Pat Calvert, and colleagues at Wardell Armstrong.
In the United States, thanks to the following: John App, Ben Bushman,
John Curtis, Paige Hartley, Norm Jackson, Derek Lawther, Alan Lewis,

Margaret Miller, Rudi Rosier, Roger Thomas, and Fern Wender for their
coaching and organizational ability; and Martha and Peter Schraml, who
also codirected our Professional Soccer Academy, Simi, California.
Most importantly thanks to Dan and Marty Campbell, without whose
lasting friendship the opportunity to visit and coach in America would
never have arisen.

XI

PARTI

PREPARING

TO COACH
In Part I, I explain my views on some important ethical questions in coach-

ing and outline some strategies that I have found useful when dealing

with both individuals and groups of players. The ideas introduced in this
section should help the reader understand the following chapters on the
coaching of skills, tactics, and team management. Even if the reader is
entirely familiar with everything in this section, he or she should gain
something from it; I have found that having one's own ideas confirmed

by someone else can be an encouraging experience.

CHAPTER 1

Ethics and Coaching

Philosophy
In a soccer career extending over 20 or 30 years, a player will work with

many different coaches who have their own ideas and personal coaching
styles. While coaches will always differ in their approaches to tactics and
teamwork, I hope they share a common view about sportsmanship and
the manner in which the game should be played.

This chapter discusses three considerations that constitute, in my opinion, the basis of a code of soccer ethics. The first consideration deals with

why so many people throughout the world are attracted to soccer as a
lifetime sport— that is, first as a player and then as a coach, administrator,

or spectator. The second consideration concerns the characteristics of what
I call good play, by which I mean skillful and fair play. The third involves

your own personal coaching philosophy. You may not agree with all my
views, but the following material should help you clarify your own ideas
about the satisfactions and achievements you personally expect to gain
from coaching soccer.

Soccer as a Lifetime Sport
Those who are attracted to soccer as a lifetime sport are usually not motivated simply by keeping fit or meeting people, important though these
objectives are. People play and watch soccer because they love the game
itself and because they experience inner feelings of enjoyment, satisfaction, and achievement through playing soccer. They find soccer a game

4

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

that is worth playing for its own sake. People play soccer because they

enjoy it.

Every coach is responsible for creating an atmosphere that safeguards
this enjoyment factor, especially for younger players.

Yet coaches can-

not force players to enjoy the game, which is why personal coaching ethics
are so important. The art of coaching is getting players to enjoy soccer

because they want to, not because a coach tells them to. A love for soccer
has to be nurtured and encouraged; achieving this leads directly to the
second major consideration of soccer ethics. The link between all who
love soccer is the ability to recognize and appreciate the meaning and

importance of good play.

The Meaning and Importance of Good Play
Good play means play that is skillful. People who enjoy soccer as a lifetime sport do so because either they are or were skillful players or because they are intelligent spectators who can appreciate skillful play by
others, including team tactics as well as individual skill.

The development and appreciation of skill is of paramount importance
in coaching. The level of skill that can be achieved wUl vary according
to the age and experience of the player; thus skillful play is a matter of
judgment and intention as well as of execution. With all players, but especially with younger players, the coach must work hard to promote the

desire or intention to play skillfully.

A useful example, which also demonstrates the importance of intelligent
observation of the game, is the ill-informed coach who tells players to
kick the ball whenever it comes to them. The informed coach, in exactly

the same situation, may urge players to control the ball rather than kick

The difference between the two sets of advice lies in the greater knowledge of the informed coach, who appreciates the more advantageous
moves that result from a controlled, composed mastery of the ball. I beit.

lieve that the player who continually tries to exercise control is more likely

to develop into a skillful player. Similarly, the coach who appreciates and

rewards the intention to play skillfully is more likely to be successful in
the long run. He or she will certainly gain immense satisfaction when
players improve as a direct result of good coaching.

The second criterion of good play is that it be fair play. Soccer was
designed to be played according to a set of rules. More importantly, it
was meant to be played by players who respect not only the letter of the
law but also the spirit of the law. For example, tackling a player hard and
tackling a player so hard and in such a manner that he or she cannot take
any further part in the game are fundamentally different actions. The
difference between a hard but fair tackle and a dangerous or vicious one
lies in

the intention of the player executing the tackle and not in the

Ethics and Coaching Philosophy

5

referee's judgment, which is always retrospective. Soccer was designed

as a game of skill, not a game of brute force, and the game of soccer will
only thrive in an atmosphere in which skillful, intelligent sporting play
is appreciated by all who play, watch, and coach. To a person who really
loves soccer, what matters most is not who wins the game but the manner
in which the game is won. Wanting to win is important, but if to win
players have to commit fouls, argue, or make obscene gestures, then
although those players may have won the match, to a much greater extent
the game itself has lost. A typical example of such undesirable play is

the so-called professional foul.

The Professional Foul

A new kind of foul has crept into soccer called the professional foul. It
occurs mainly when a defender deliberately catches a ball or body checks

an opponent. In most cases the foul is committed to prevent the opposition from scoring; it is called a professional foul because although the

individual is penalized, the team benefits.
If nobody gets hurt, why is the professional foul considered to be such
a negative influence in the game? The professional foul is wrong because
it

spoils the game; allowing such fouls to occur destroys the game of

soccer. Soccer was designed to be played according to certain rules and

in a spirit of fair play. If these rules are deliberately violated, then the

game as it was meant to be played no longer exists. Coaches and players
must accept their responsibility to the game and must work together to
eliminate any form of behavior that weakens the game. Such a stance
an ethical one and as such embraces the personal philosophy

is clearly

of each individual coach.

What Is Your Philosophy?
Consider to what extent you agree with my philosophy that the main
responsibility of every coach is to develop a love for the game by encouraging play that is skillful and fair and that takes place in an enjoyable sport-

ing environment. In considering

this,

you must

also

examine the

importance of winning.

A Winning Coach
Nothing is wrong with wanting to win. The whole purpose of coaching
is to improve performance and, ultimately, to improve the chances of
winning.

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

6

My experience— which includes professional clubs in which winning
and job security go hand in hand and Olympic competition in which
winning is a matter of fierce national pride— has shown that a coach who
continually encourages and emphasizes good play is actually more likely
to be a winning coach. That coach's team will be better coached, better
organized, more skillful and, most of all, more resilient in times of stress
because players are happier and enjoy a better team spirit.
Anyone engaged in competition will benefit from striving to win until
the last possible moment. Not to try one's best is insulting to one's opponent and diminishes or even destroys the game as a spectacle.
My philosophy, therefore, certainly embraces the desire to win. Indeed,
emphasizes that players should strive to win until the very last moment
of the game. This philosophy does draw a very clear line between wanting to win and wanting to win at any cost. For example, 1 reject the behavior of a coach who, in seeking to win, advocates dangerous tackling,
verbally abuses players or officials, keeps a badly injured player in the
game, or deliberately cheats on a player's eligibility. Such acts could never
be admissible in my philosophy because they put winning the game before
a concern for the well-being of the players and the spirit of fair play.
At this point 1 invite you to consider your own position. What is your
philosophy? What kind of coach are you? What kind of coach would you
like to be? To what extent, if at all, do you share my philosophy? What
you think and how you feel should have a direct bearing upon how you
it

actually behave.

A Soccer Code of Ethics
In ethics, what matters is what one does, not what one thinks or says.

An ideal has little value until it is put into practice, and for this reason
1 now outline my personal code of ethics which 1 hope can be followed
by everyone involved in soccer— players, spectators, and coaches.
•

Certain fundamental concepts must be taught; the most important
of these is an appreciation of what is meant by good play.

•

Good play is skillful, fair, and sporting play that does not include
foul or abusive language.

The attitude of the players toward the match officials is vital. The
referees' job is to ensure that skillful soccer prevails. They may make
mistakes, but players must be encouraged to accept decisions without rancor, as dissent quickly destroys the atmosphere of any game.
• A game played in a fair, sporting manner will be more enjoyable for

•

all

concerned.

Ethics and Coaching Philosophy

7

Nothing is wrong with wanting to win; what is wrong is wanting
to win at any cost. A person who really loves soccer cares less about
who wins the game than the manner in which it is won.
• An important task for any coach is to encourage a love for the game
•

in all
•

who come into his or her sphere of influence.

The coach must educate parents and spectators to acknowledge good
play by both sides and to allow for mistakes, especially by younger
players.

The coach must always put the welfare of players before the result
of a game.
• The coach is a model figure and should behave accordingly. The coach
•

should not shout at players or officials.
In following chapters I show how this philosophy influences how we
relate to and communicate with our players; I also show what kinds of

coaching styles are most effective in developing a love for the game and
in encouraging players to enjoy both practice and playing.

CHAPTER 2

Individual Coaching

Strategies
This chapter provides an insight into coaching strategies that have been
helpful to me, especially when dealing with individual players.

Coaching Follows Observation
My first strategy is that coaching follows observation. Coaching is always
retrospective; it is the exchange that takes place between you and your

players after you have seen them perform. Of course, you may introduce
a topic verbally or demonstrate what you want players to learn, but this

not coaching. Coaching only begins when you attempt to change or
develop what the players are doing.
If you start by telling players what you want them to do, you run the
risk of underestimating their ability and wasting their time. It is very
embarrassing to give a lengthy introduction only to find that some, if not

is

all,

are already expert at the skill. It is much better to see players in action

before you attempt to coach them. Only after you have seen players in
action are you able to gauge your starting level according to their ability.

For this reason, this book provides many examples of warm-up activities
and small-team games that will enable you to watch your players in action
before you start to coach them.
The same advice holds true for coaching team tactics. The work that
you do in preparing your team will be based largely upon your observation of the previous game or your observation of your opponents. In both

10

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

cases, you are coaching after observation. The best way to start a coach-

ing session is to say, "In last week's game I noticed that. ..."

Good Diagnosis
My second strategy is concerned with good diagnosis. Like a doctor, the
coach has to be able to diagnose correctly before prescribing a cure. Soccer
coaches often say: If you can't see it, you can't coach it.
This means that you must have the knowledge and experience to diagnose a problem in order to improve performance. Furthermore, you also
have to know when to offer a physical cure and when to offer a psychological one. Because good diagnosis is so important, the nine chapters
in this book on the coaching of skills all carefully explain the key points

of each of the basic skills. In addition, the principles of team play by which

you can diagnose how well your team is playing are covered in chapter 15.

Coach the Players, Not the Drill
Clearly, good diagnosis depends upon your personal knowledge and ex-

perience, but it also depends upon your observations of what another

person is actually doing. In soccer you never just coach a skill; you always
coach a player how to perform the skill. There is always another person
involved, and this is my third strategy— the recognition that you coach
the player, not the drill.
Some coaches think they can produce a successful coaching session
simply by running players through a conglomeration of drills. Good drills
are important because they help to isolate a particular skill, but by themselves drills never produce or guarantee success. Drills provide a starting
point, but what matters more is how you progress the drill according to
the ability and response of the players. This leads to my fourth strategy.

Progressive Practices
The ability to start with a simple practice and gradually develop it into
a realistic game situation is one of the hallmarks of a good coach. Drills
must be progressed (and sometimes this means simplified) according to
how the players respond. Throughout this book, I show how each drill
can be progressed according to the response of the players. The ability

Individual Coaching Strategies

to develop progressive coaching situations also leads to

11

my next strategy,

which is concerned with the ability to open the mind of the player through
good communication.

Good Communication
Communication is a field of knowledge in its own right, one that has
produced much valuable advice. For example, we all have the ability to
receive as well as transmit messages, but many coaches are more skilled
at transmitting their ideas than receiving other ideas.

We might improve

ourselves as coaches simply by becoming better listeners! Also, we know

and gestures (nonverbal communication)
and
most importantly, what we say or do often carries with it an emotional
message. For example, some people can convey intense anger with a softly
spoken word or inject humor into the most violent-looking gestures. I
want to highlight three types of communication that are especially important and that all have one thing in common. They all require the coach
to gain access to the minds of the players. I call this opening the mind
of the player. The three main approaches, which are often combined, are
physical, visual, and verbal communication.
that body language, posture,

are all very important in transmitting messages to others. Finally,

Physical Communication
Shaping, which involves guiding players' limbs through the correct movement, is more important with younger players. Young children must discover how to perform new skills, and they learn more by doing and feeling
the correct pattern or shape of the movement than by listening. Giving
a player the feel of a movement can be a very productive approach, and
sometimes it is the only approach! It is particularly valuable, for example,

when teaching the correct positions for the foot and knee in the push
pass, especially in the follow-through (chapter 5). Similarly, it is invaluable

when teaching players to relax the foot or thigh when controlling the ball
(chapter 4) or to tense the muscles in the neck and shoulders when heading the ball (chapter 11).

Using this technique affords a special advantage when coaching smaller
children. In order to shape a movement, you often have to kneel in front
of the pupil with your eyes on the same level as the player. Youngsters
really do respond to being coached by someone who is literally on their

own level rather than by someone towering above them and, perhaps,
talking down to them in more ways than one.

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

12

Visual Communication-Good Demonstration
The ability to demonstrate well is a priceless gift. Not only does a good
demonstration provide a picture for the watching players, it adds to your
charisma and prevents the boredom of long verbal explanations. The important considerations for a good demonstration include the following:
• Simplicity. Emphasize only one major point and perhaps one minor

point each time you demonstrate. Bring out additional features in
•

the next demonstration.
Reasonable goals. Your demonstration should always set goals that
are within the ability of the players.

Use of body language. If you want players to move quickly and
urgently, demonstrate the correct pace and tempo of the movement.
If you want to stress calmness and composure, let your body movements and your voice convey these qualities.
• Ability to talk while demonstrating. This enables you to draw attention to key points while you are actually demonstrating them.
• Appropriate amount of demonstration. Restrict demonstrations to
one or two repetitions. You may get away with demonstrating a skill
three times, but four or more demonstrations will usually bore your
•

audience.

What If My Demonstration Goes Wrong?

You cannot afford to continually make errors in front of your students.
How, then, do you handle a mistake when demonstrating? Following
are three useful strategies:

Always try to rehearse in private. If you need a server, practice with
him or her. If the server makes a mistake in the actual demonstration, don't try to compensate; stop and try again.
2. Before you demonstrate, say to the group, "I may need two or three
attempts to get this demonstration right." If you alert the group
to the possibility of failure, you don't have a disaster if you fail.
Furthermore, this implies that the players too must be prepared
for failure and that failure is not necessarily a bad thing. Of course,
1.

succeeding the first time is a bonus.
3.

Whether your demonstration is successful or not, stop after the third
attempt. Don't keep on failing! If you are not successful by the third
attempt, start the players working with a comment such as, "Sorry,
it's not going well for me today, but you can see what is needed!"
No one is perfect, and the players would rather practice themselves
than watch you fail. A sincere coach will have nothing to fear from
an occasional failure.

Individual Coaching Strategies

13

What Do I Do If I Simply Can't Demonstrate?
The ability to give good demonstrations is a priceless asset. There are
limits, how^ever, and no one who is seriously interested in coaching soccer
should be discouraged because he or she cannot demonstrate. You w^ould
not, for example, expect every track coach to sprint 100 meters in under

10 seconds! What matters most is that the coach knows what should be

done and why.

A coach who does not feel confident enough to demonstrate can employ a number of strategies. These include a preselected demonstrator,
the discovery approach, a group challenge, and visual aids.

The Preselected Demonstrator. Select a good performer, take him or
her to one side, and rehearse the skill or movement several times. Then
let this

player demonstrate for the entire group.

The Discovery Approach. With this method you introduce the topic
and start the group without an introductory demonstration. For example,
to coach accuracy in passing you might start with the players in pairs
passing to each other, or you might organize minigames of 3 vs. 3. Then
you watch for players who perform the skill well. When these players
identify themselves, stop the practice and allow them to demonstrate for
the others.

This method is very useful when coaching restarts
such as free kicks and corners. Give small groups of players the same
task, for example, working out an attacking free kick. After a set period
of time let each group demonstrate in turn. In this way you will produce
a number of different tactical moves to discuss with the players. Further,
you will have challenged their initiative.

Group Challenge.

Visual Aids. Coaching videos and wall charts are useful but must be
used with care. Examine films in advance, and show only the section you
want students to see. Showing a complete film can be a waste of time.

Verbal Communication
Coaches probably use verbal communication more than any other method,
and I believe that strategic feedback really can contribute dramatically to
your coaching effectiveness. When you tell players what to do, always
try to consider how they will receive your message; try to anticipate their
reactions. For example, imagine that your players are involved in a practice. After watching them, you know what you want to say to them, but
they are completely unaware of the kind of news they are about to receive.
For the players, it could be good or bad news; they are either going to be
praised or corrected. This presents you, the coach, with the opportunity

14

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

to develop a very special coaching technique, which I call the double positive approach.

The Double Positive Approach
For the player, receiving good news is always pleasant. We all enjoy being praised, providing we know that it is sincere praise. Therefore, when
you see a successful performance, stop the practice and explain and
demonstrate why the performance is successful. I call this kind of motivation a double positive because the player is positively reinforced for
good play and you simultaneously establish the correct points of technique for the benefit of all engaged in the practice.
However, players do make mistakes. When coaching young, sensitive
players, you must try to correct mistakes without discouraging players.
If you go directly to the negative— the failure or mistake— you can very
easily make a player feel insecure to such an extent that he or she may
avoid taking the responsibility to try again. Fortunately, you can always

make a positive opening remark before you correct what the player is
." or "Yes, that move was
doing wrong. For example, "Good try, but
."
OK, but.
By giving an encouraging opening comment, you make the player feel
secure and thus receptive. To be really effective, you must open the
player's mind to advice. In this way you avoid creating the closed mind
of the irritated or reluctant player whose negative emotions might momen.

.

.

.

tarily interfere with cooperation and reason. In

my view, the double posi-

If you can
spend most of your coaching life looking for and positively reinforcing
what is right, good, and correct, then you are much more likely to be
a happy, successful, and respected coach.

tive approach is the most important of all of the strategies.

The Question-and-Answer Technique
mistake for any coach to continually tell players what they
should be doing. You can often achieve far more by asking players rather
than telling. 1 recommend what is known as the question-and-answer
technique. For example, if you ask your players a question like "Who
can tell me why that was such a good pass?" or "What defensive system
are our opponents using?" you will achieve two objectives. First, you

I believe it is a

will elicit the correct technical diagnosis; second, by involving the players

in the discussion, you will encourage them to develop their own powers

of observation and critical analysis. Getting players to appreciate and

develop their own knowledge of the game is surely at the heart of good
coaching, and the question-and-answer technique enhances this process.

(

1

16

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

and physical states of the players. The coach who takes the time and
trouble to organize in advance is much more likely to be successful. A
well-organized group session will have a clear objective; will be welltimed, progressive, and demanding; and will involve every player for
the maximum possible time.
It follows that, because good organization is both general and specific,
examples are best considered in relation to specific objectives and prac-

tices. For this reason, every practice in this book includes detailed advice

on organization. However, I do recommend one general system of organizing large numbers of players into manageable groups. This is called
the grid system or the coaching grid and is worth examining in detail.

The Grid System of Coaching
One of the most useful strategies for dealing with a large class is to subdivide the group into smaller, more manageable coaching units, ideally
of equal ability. One of the best ways to achieve this in a soccer lesson
is

by using a coaching grid.

A coaching grid is an area on the field that is divided into squares that
are usually of 10 yards but can vary according to the age of the players

and the available space. On school fields, the grids should be permanently
marked with chalk lines, but flags, cones, or other markers provide effective substitutes (Figures 3.1a and b). Grids can be of any shape depending upon the available area. One-yard circles at intersections make useful
targets.

o-

-^

-Q)

^

c^-

G

G

(^

^>

^

-^

Figure 3.
Typical layouts for coactiing grids.

As a general rule, minigames require grids of approximately 10 square
yards for each player; thus a 3 vs. 3 game would be played on six grids
comprising an area 30 x 20 yards.

Group Coaching Strategies

17

Features of the Grid System
The grid system has several interesting features; understanding them wiE
help you gain maximum benefit from your practices.

Maximum Bail-Contact Time
In a full 11 vs. 11 game, playing time is reduced by stoppages from 90
to 60 minutes (or a 2:3 ratio to the length of the game being played), and
this

does not include the time lost when the ball is traveling between

players. If every player were to have a fair share of the ball during the

game, he or she would get a maximum of 3 minutes contact. We know
that such a distribution is impossible because some players monopolize
the ball and others touch it rarely, such as the goalkeeper. By using the
grid to produce minigames and by arranging two or three players in each
game, this automatically improves the baU-contact time. Because children
learn largely by doing, the wisdom of this method is evident.

Easy Control of the Time-Space Variables
The numbers of players and the amount of space they require can be easily
controlled— the less able the player, the more time and space he or she
needs to execute the practice (chapter 5).

Progressive Decision Making
Closely allied to time-space variables is the advantage of progressive decision making.

We do not take a novice driver on the freeway; similarly,

we do not throw a young player directly into a full-game situation, especially if we want that player to learn how to make intelligent, composed
decisions. To foster good decision making we start players off in simple
situations and in a friendly environment.

The coaching grid provides this environment. For example, a player
starts to learn passing in a simple 2 vs. 1 situation on two grids. Then,

by putting several adjacent grids together and playing 3 vs. 3, the player
graduates to a more difficult situation.
In the hands of the skillful coach, the grid system provides an excellent

opportunity to develop the skills of players in a controlled manner.

Easily Identified Targets for Players

The lines restrict the area of play, and they can also provide targets and
encourage positive attitudes in the players. A simple example is a 1 vs.
1 dribbling practice in which one player defends one of the lines of the
square while a partner tries to reach, or cross, the line.

18

Skills

and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Better Use of Space
Finally, the coaching grid enables players to utilize the areas of grass that

are away from the main playing field. In this way the match surface is

protected against excessive wear and full use is made of the whole field.

Note: The coaching grid can be overused and can prevent the players
from becoming familiar with the larger team environment. A good coach
will know how to achieve a balance between the grid system and other
systems such as the wave attack system (p. 305), shadow soccer (p. 307),
and coaching in the game (p. 297).

Good Selection Within Groups
It's always difficult to

accommodate the varying levels of ability that exist

within a group. In soccer, you will need to consider at least two different
situations: how to accommodate players of different ability for skill practices and

how to select teams for small-team scrimmages that will all have

a reasonable chance of winning.

Selecting for Skill Practices
In an ideal world, the strong would help the weak to improve. However,

pairing a good player with a weak player and expecting the one to help

the other is usually a mistake. In reality, neither will derive much pleasure
or make much progress. When coaching skills, try to match players or

groups for ability so that you encourage fair competition.

Selecting for Team Games
Conversely, to encourage fair competition between miniteams (e.g., 5 vs.
5),

you must distribute your strong players and weaker players evenly

to foster equal competition.

When selecting teams, never bring the best players to the front of the
group and let them select team players in sequence. Those who are among
the last to be selected are terribly embarrassed and even humiliated. No
youngster wants to be labeled a less able player, and you as the coach
must ensure that no one is placed in this kind of situation. This situation
is easy to avoid; simply select teams in advance and read them off your
notes, or select randomly and rely on your experience to enable you to
select balanced teams.

Group Coaching Strategies

19

Getting the Group Started
Whenever a coach is faced with wet, cold, or inclement field conditions, he
or she can do much useful preparatory work while the group is changing
indoors. For example, the coach can tell the students who they are work-

ing with and how to start their first practice before they go out to the
field. In normal conditions, however, the coach, after preparing the field

and equipment in advance, begins coaching when the group is assembled.
In these circumstances,

I

recommend three useful strategies.

Position the Group Properly
Ensure that the players are grouped so they can see and hear you. Remember, you should face the sun and keep their backs toward any distraction
(e.g.,

another game).

Gain Attention Quicicly
Don't start until everyone is listening. If players are not paying attention,
don't wait for them to become quiet because this wastes valuable time.
Take the initiative. Bring them to attention by using any of the following
techniques, which are listed in order of severity: a glance (eye contact
is a marvelous thing); a raised finger; a quiet word (perhaps "thank you");
a spoken name; a firm command. Don't shout or blow your whistle.
Shouting can destroy your charisma and may give the impression that
you are uncertain of your authority. Save your shout and your whistle
for emergencies.

Keep Your Introduction Short
Keep your opening remarks as short as possible— two sentences if you
can. For example, "I want to help you develop more accuracy in passing.
Watch as I demonstrate."
Certainly you must tell the players what you intend to coach, but showing them is far more important (as discussed in chapter 2).

Keeping Momentum in Your Lesson
When handling a large group, you can easily lose momentum and interest
when you have to stop one practice and move to another progression.
To avoid long delays, I employ what I call the one-step-ahead technique.

20

Skills

and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

While the class is working on the given topic, take a small group or
even one individual aside and rehearse the next skill. Then you can stop
the main group and let the small group or individual demonstrate the

new task.
Obviously, this method helps you avoid wasting time between activities
and causing problems of class control. By thinking "one move ahead"
like a chess player, you save time between practices and achieve pace
and momentum in your coaching. This is one of the hallmarks of a good
coach.

Accommodating Different Rates of Progress
One way to achieve a reasonable balance of progress between the more
and less able in a group is to use what I call the five-stage strategy. The
best way to explain this approach is by using a flowchart diagram (Figure
3.2),

from which you will see how you might progress your coaching

according to the presence or absence of a common fault or ability. The
model may look complicated, but in fact it is a very simple concept to
grasp and use. You will quickly appreciate how this strategy fits in with
the other recommendations I have made, such as preparing your next
coaching point or demonstration in advance of stopping the group. The

method also follows my general advice that coaching follows observation.
This method will help you to achieve an optimum rate of progress for
the group based upon the ability of the average members. By ensuring
that the majority can execute the skill reasonably well, you avoid going
too fast or too slow.

Planning Your Coactting Session
Starting with a blank sheet of paper, draw three boxes horizontally con-

nected by a line.

Ask yourself, "What is the main skill or theme I want to coach in this
session?" Suppose that you want to coach the skill of supporting the
player with the ball. You must now think of the best possible practice
situation for developing this ability,

and write the situation in Box 2.

In the case of support play, you will need a practice that involves both

supporting and opposing players; a good example is 3 vs. 2 (or 4 vs. 1
for less able players).

Now ask yourself, "How can

I

best develop the 3 vs. 2 situation into

a larger game-like practice?" and write the answer in Box 3 (chapter 5).

Group Coaching Strategies

21

In our example the answer might be 5 vs. 5 on a half-sized field, but
it

could also be a game such as "floater" (chapter 6).

STAGE ONE
START YOUR PRACTICE

STAGE TWO
LOOK AROUND THE WHOLE GROUP AND ASK
YOURSELF
"CAN

I

SEE A COMMON FAULT?"

(That is more than 25% going wrong)

IF

THE ANSWER IS "YES'
GO TO 3

IF

THE ANSWER IS "NO'
GO TO 4

STOP THE PRACTICE

STAGE FOUR
MOVE AROUND THE GROUP
COACHING

CORRECT THE COMMON

ALLOW TIME FOR PLAYERS

FAULT

TO IMPROVE

RESTART THE SAME
PRACTICE

GIVE GENERAL
ENCOURAGEMENT

REPEAT STAGE TWO

GO TO STAGE FIVE

STAGE THREE

STAGE FIVE

ADVANCE THE PRACTICE
INTRODUCE A PROGRESSION OR
START A NEW ACTIVITY

Figure 3.2

The five-stage strategy for group coaching.

22

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Finally, ask yourself, "What activities can I use to start the session?"
Write the answer in Box 1. In our case, this might be 4 vs. 1 passing outside the square (p. 63). Your diagram now looks like Figure 3.3.

Box 1

PART

II

SKILLS AND

TECHNIQUES
In Part II, I offer you my ideas on coaching the eight basic skills that,

with goalkeeping, constitute the fundamentals of soccer. Some of the skills
are well-known standards; some I have discovered for myself. I hope you
will find of particular value the

way I have presented the skUls in a

progressive sequence. I start with beginning skills and move to the inter-

mediate stage and then to advanced practices that have been used with
professional players. Once you have determined the starting ability of
your own players, you will be able to select skills according to their ages,

and abilities.
hope that you wUl also appreciate my ideas on how to coach the mind
of the player. Being able to execute a skill in isolation is one thing; being
able to execute the same skill in a game situation is another. The key is
knowing how to coach the basic skills in realistic, game situations— this
is something 1 hope to share with you.
aptitudes,
I

23

(

1

26

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

the ball. With a flat, driven ball or hard ground pass, the player should
use a part of the body such as the chest or the inside of the foot as a
cushion. When a ball is bouncing on the fly, the player should use a wedge
or angle, usually made by the foot or ankle and the ground, into which

the ball falls.

The Platform
The three most common platforms are the instep, the top of the thigh,
and the forehead. By presenting a flat surface underneath the ball and
withdrawing the surface on impact, the player takes speed or momentum
off the ball. This is usually called

"taking the pace off the ball."

The Instep
Here the raised instep receives or catches the dropping ball. Ideally, the
ball remains in contact with the instep throughout; at worst the ball stays

within easy reach. Because the player must balance on one leg to execute
the move, his or her arms should be held out wide to improve this balance
(Figure 4.1).

Figure 4.
Control with the instep.

The Thigh
Depending upon how vertically the ball is dropping, the platform of the
thigh is raised between 40° and 90° to receive the ball. Again, the arms

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

27

are held sideways for balance but because the chest is tilted slightly forward, the whole body position is more compact and stable than with the
instep method. Because of this stability and the much larger platform involved, the thigh trap is both easier and safer to perform. Done well, the
ball drops straight from the thigh to the ground; a bounce off or upward
from the thigh indicates poor execution (Figure 4.2).

Figure 4.2
Control with the thigh.

The Forehead
Catching or controlling a dropping ball with the forehead is a more difficult skill. The key is focusing the eyes under the ball, which almost gives

the feeling that the eyes, not the forehead, catch the ball. This ensures
that the head is tilted back, thus presenting the forehead as a better platform to receive the ball.
The knees can also help the head and shoulders cushion the ball by
bobbing down at the moment of impact. The feet should be spread wide
to allow the whole body to act like a shock absorber. When this skill is
executed properly, the ball drops to the ground or can be controlled again

on the thigh (Figure 4.3).

The Cushion
One-touch control of a ball driven hard on a flat trajectory or along the
ground is good play. It is achieved by positioning a part of the body in
the ball's path and cushioning the impact as the ball strikes. Obviously,
the larger the cushion presented as a target, the easier the control factor.

28

Skills

and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 4.3
Control vv/n :ne forehead.

For this reason the chest (which can also be used as a plattonn) and
stomach are two good areas to use (Figure 4.4).
The other areas that can be used as a cushion are the inside of the thigh
when the knee is raised sideways (Figure 4.5) and the inside of the ankle
when the foot is square to the line of flight (Figure 4.6).

Figure 4.4
Control with the chest.

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

29

Figure 4.5
Control with the inside of the thigh.

Figure 4.6
Control with the inside of the ankle.

The Wedge
With this technique the player makes an angle or wedge between the
ground and the foot and lets the ball drop into this space. The most effective wedges are made with the sole of the foot or the inside or outside

of the ankle.

30

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The Sole of the Foot
Here the toes are raised but the heel is held low to produce the angle
of the sloping wedge shape. The arms are usually held wide for balance,
and the body is crouched or in a sitting position (Figure 4.7).

Figure 4.7
Control with the sole of the foot.

With this skill, the beginner must be taught to gently control the ball
with the underneath of the toes. Performed correctly, this skill imparts
a backspin on the ball, which brings it closer to the receiver (Figure 4.8).

Figure 4.8
Finesse the ball gently to get back spin.

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

31

Beginners must not be allowed to stamp on the ball; this is unnatural
and ineffective.

The Inside and Outside of the Ankle

When the receiver is faced with a dropping ball and an onrushing opponent, he or she must be able to control the ball and move away from

danger in the same movement. To do this, the player must control the
ball with either the inside (the most popular) or the outside of the foot.

In both cases, the movement requires a body lean in the direction in which

the ball is to be controlled (Figure 4.9).

Figure 4.9

Body lean is necessary when controlling the ball with a) the inside of the
foot/ankle, or b) the outside of the foot/ankle.

Drills for Beginners
I

recommend four drills for teaching beginners how to control the ball.

The first drill involves controlling the ball with the thigh, the easiest
method to learn, and the second involves controlling the ball with the
instep. (Both drills involve platform techniques and are ideal confidence
builders.) For teaching beginners how to control with the inside and outside of the foot and to use different parts of the body to cushion the ball,
I

recommend self-serve practices. Self-serve practices are useful because

beginners can set their own targets; however, these practices don't sustain
motivation in students. The answer is limited use; 3 to 5 minutes is long

enough. That is not to say, however, that a dedicated youngster will not
spend hours playing against the garage wall at home! These practices soon
develop into the partner activities recommended for intermediates.

32

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

CONTROL WITH THE THIGH— THE THREE-HANDS METHOD

Figure 4. 10

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs (1 server, 1 receiver).
Instructions

The server stands 2 yards from the receiver, and using both hands,
serves a gentle, underarm lob directly onto the thigh of the receiver.
The receiver tries to catch the ball on the thigh, let the ball fall directly
to the ground, and then push pass it back to the server (Figure 4.10).
Coaching Points
The ball should fall directly to the ground. If the ball bounces upward off the top of the thigh, then the force has not been absorbed
correctly. Players should watch for this key point.
Coaching Progressions

The receiver initially catches the ball and then raises the knee up to it.
Next, the receiver catches the ball with thigh and hands together
(i.e.,

the three-hands method).

The receiver uses the thigh only.

The receiver uses both left and right thighs in turn.
The server increases the distance of the throw to 3 yards and the
height to just under head height.
The receiver returns the ball to the server with an accurate push pass.

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

33

CONTROL WITH THE INSTEP

Figure 4.11

Equipment
1 ball for each 3 players.

Organization

Players are in teams of 3 (1 server, 1 receiver, 1 supporter).
Instructions

The server executes a gentle, underhand throw using both hands,
aiming directly at the receiver's instep.

The receiver tries to keep the ball "tied" onto his or her instep while
leaning on the supporter for balance (Figure 4.11).
Coaching Points

The receiver can relax the foot by shaking it.
The receiver should feel that he or she is hanging the foot about
4 inches above the ground.

The receiver should toe down.
bounces forward off the receiver's foot, that player's ankle
and foot are not relaxed sufficiently or the ball has hit the lower leg,

If the ball

not the relaxed foot.
If the

throw is accurate and the foot is relaxed, the ball remains on

the foot as if by magic.

Coaching Progressions

The server moves further and further back, up to 5 to 10 yards
depending on the skill of the receiver. The ball is thrown on a higher
trajectory, 6 to 10 feet.

M

Skills and Si!iik'j;K's lui Li>iiLi»mg Soccer

Tlic rcicivcr no Iomj'/m" Ic.jms on
liirs lo

riu' n'tcivi'i
I

Ik" h\ cixiM

*

.ill

lonlrol

l\\c

llu"

snpporliT.

l>.ill

with .jltnnaU' li'ri.

lu's llu" h.iil on llu' insli'p .\iul in Ihc s.inu' inovrini'nl

lurns .iionnJ wilh

((>nlv skilllul pl.tyiMS siiouUI .illcrnpl

llic b.ill

Ihis.) rius skill I .in be iisihI lor .uK'.iiu t'tl slu)«)lin}; [>r.u tin's in vvluch
sl.iiuls on llu-

llu' pl.iv'iM

Ihc j',*>.il,

I

pen. illy .irc.i wilh his oi Ium [\u k toward

.lU lu's llu- h.ill,

Inins, .muI shoots

(i

h.ipU'i

10).

CONTROL WITH THE INSIDE AND OUTSIDE OF THE FOOT

(^'"""-

Figure 4.12

This pi'.utiif is rMi'lK'nt lof ItMiiiin}', how to usr thr wriij',o tnotlux.! oi
lonlmllinr, tlu* Inuiiuiiiv; h.ill.

Equipment
I

h.ill

tor f.u h pl.iNiM".

Orgflnizfltlon

huln iihi.il pl.i\(Ms st.iiul in dec sp.ui* hul must hi'w.m* o\ oihcvs.
Instructions
ri.tvtMs thii'w

llu' h.ill inti>

i.uuls (the I'ttih o\ tlu"

t>utsulr ot

till"

toot

h.ill)

thr ,u\
.iiul

\uo\ c lo the point

UMitrol

it

.it

whuh

it

usinr, tlu' insuli> o\ \\\c

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

35

Coaching Points
Players must move quickly to the pitch of the ball.

Players must achieve the correct angle with the foot and ankle to
control the ball.

Players must lean in the direction in w^hich they intend to move the
ball.

Players must control the ball at the moment it first touches the

ground, not after it has bounced or on the second bounce (Figure
4.12).

Coaching Progressions
Players throw the ball at different heights and in different directions

but never so far or so high that they cannot reasonably get to the
pitch of the ball. Players should set realistic goals.
Players decide which part of the ankle— inside or outside— to use

and try to stick to this decision.
Players try not only to control the ball but also to move or sweep
it

away in different directions as if beating an opponent.

The player starts at a fixed point and sees how far he or she can
throw the ball and still reach and control it.

WALL AS A PARTNER

Figure 4.13

36

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

This practice is very useful in teaching players how to learn the cushion
method of controlling the driven ball and also how to use the forehead.

Equipment
1 ball for each player, plus a large vertical surface.

Organization

Individual players stand in free space.
Instructions

Players throw the ball at the wall and try to control the ball after
it

rebounds (Figure 4.13).

Coaching Points
Select the part of the body to control the ball as early as possible.

Coaching Progressions
Players increase the force of the rebound.
Players decrease the distance from the wall, thus reducing the time
available to execute control.

Players preselect which part of the body should be used.

Players control the ball and turn away from the wall in one move.
Players

move up and down alongside the wall, controlling the

rebound at an angle— just like the wall pass (p. 57).

Drills for Intermediates
Partner practices are excellent for developing all the different methods
of ball control. These practices permit the service to be varied according
to the ability of the receiver, and they also provide a very effective activityto-rest ratio. They do require players to recognize two different attitudes-

cooperation and competition. First, players are responsible for serving
the ball to their partners in a cooperative manner; players have a duty
to provide a careful, accurate service to help their partners improve. Only

when partners are ready should they begin to compete with each other;
this should not be done too soon. The coach is responsible for the change

of attitude from cooperation to competition between the two players. I

always direct when this change should take place.

PARTNER PRACTICE 1— ALTERNATING TARGETS
Equipment
1 ball for each

2 players; 2 markers.

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

37

D

Figure 4. 14

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 server, 1 receiver). Markers
are placed 5 yards apart.
Instructions

The server throws the ball underhand alternately to the two markers.

The receiver moves sideways and controls the ball using any suitable method, or in response to a predetermined method, and plays
the ball back to the server (Figure 4.14).

Coaching Points

The ball must be absolutely stationary before it is returned to the
server. It must not be played back directly.
Coaching Progressions
Players start with a simple, underhand throw.
Players increase the speed and difficulty of the serve (e.g., using
a spin).

Players serve the ball in the air so it bounces at the point of control.
Players change to a one-handed (javelin type) throw service to increase realism.

Players progress to pressure training (p. 356).
Players set targets (e.g., how many perfect controls can be achieved
in 1 minute).

38

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

PARTNER PRACTICE 2— GOALKEEPER

Figure 4. 15

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players; 2

markers.

Organization
Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 server who stands 7 to 10 yards

from the goal, 1 receiver). Markers are placed 5 yards apart (Figure
4.15).

Instructions

The receiver is a goalkeeper and must defend goals without using
his or her hands.

The server tries to score.
Coaching Points

The receiver should select the controlling method early.
The receiver should position as much of his or her body into the
path of the ball as possible to reduce errors.

The receiver should try to achieve one-touch control.
Coaching Progressions
Players cooperate before competing.

The server starts with a thrown ball before progressing to a volley
or half-volley serve from the hand.
The receiver rolls the ball to the server who shoots. The first-time
shot produces a very demanding challenge for the receiver.

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

39

PARTNER PRACTICE 3— REBOUND

Figure 4.16

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players; 2 markers.

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 server, 1 receiver). Markers
are placed 5 yards apart (Figure 4.16).
Instructions

The receiver stands 2 to 3 feet behind the goal line and controls the
ball to prevent it from bouncing forward through the goalposts and
across the goal line.

The server plays the ball on the ground or as close as possible to
the ground.

Coaching Points
Players should use the cushion method, especially with the inside
of the ankle.

Players should select the controlling surface early.
Players should relax and withdraw the controlling surface on impact.

Coaching Progressions

The server starts with a push pass directly at the receiver.
The server plays the ball to the left and right of the receiver.
The server increases the speed and height of the service according
to ability.

The receiver stands 1 to 2 feet behind the goal line, the reduced space
making control more difficult.

40

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Players see how many successful controls they can achieve in a set

number of serves.

Drills for Advanced Players

Advanced drills require active opposition to generate the realism of the
game. This does not necessarily mean that the opposing player must be
100% aggressive from the start of the practice, but while early opposition
might be passive, the later stages of advanced practices will always involve
a high degree of healthy competition. For this reason players must be

matched according to their abilities.

1

VS. 1

Figure 4.17

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs, 5 yards apart.
Instructions

The server throws the ball underhand to the receiver. The server
becomes the opponent and tries to dispossess the receiver.

The receiver controls the ball and must either keep possession for
5 to 10 seconds or must beat the opponent (Figure 4.17).

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

41

Coaching Points

The receiver can make the control factor easier by moving the ball
aw^ay from the incoming opponent (Figure 4.18a) or harder by faking and disguising the move when the opponent rushes in (Figure
4.18b).

Easier

Harder

Figure 4. 18

Coaching Progressions

The server waits until the receiver actually touches the ball before
moving in.

The server moves in while the ball is still in the air.
The server varies the speed and flight of the service.

3 VS. 1 IN A CIRCLE

In the previous drills, the receiver has been able to see where the oppo-

nents are positioned. In this practice, the defenders can come from behind
the receiver, which creates an exciting progression.

42

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 4.19

Equipment
1 ball for each 5 players.

Organization

Players are in groups of 5 (1 receiver, 1 server, 3 defenders). The

defenders and server form a 5-yard radius circle around the receiver
(Figure 4.19).
Instructions

The server serves underhand to the receiver. The defender who is
to tackle, or put pressure on the receiver, is nominated by the server
at the moment the ball is thrown. The server can nominate more
than one defender as the practice develops. The server may also
elect to be a defender.

The receiver gains and keeps possession of the ball for a given period
(e.g., 10 seconds) or controls the ball and breaks out of the circle
by dribbling.
Coaching Points

The receiver should try to control and shield the ball from all incoming opponents.
Coaching Progressions
The practice can be made easier or harder for the receiver if the server
identifies defenders who are out of the receiver's sight. For example,
consider the starting positions for the defenders shown in Figure
4.19:
•

Position A is easy because the receiver can see the defender and

move both ways to avoid him or her.
• Position

C is hard because the receiver cannot see the defender

and does not know which way to move.

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

43

The coach, or server, can instruct up to 3 defenders to try to dispossess the receiver.

The coach can also make things easier for the defender by allowing
the server to help the receiver, thus making the practice 2 vs. 1, 2
vs. 2, or 2 vs. 3.

This practice is especially good for attackers who frequently have
to play, often with their backs toward the goal, against 2 or more

defenders.

GAME PRACTICE— THROW-CONTROL-PASS-PICK UP-THROW

Figure 4.20

The 2 vs. 1 practice can easily be developed in a small-team game.
Equipment
1 ball for each 3 players;

4 flags or cones.

Organization

Players are in teams of 3 (or 4) on a 30 x 20 yard (or 40 x 30 yard)
minifield marked by flags or cones.
Instructions

The aim of the game is to keep possession and to develop control
skills. Player A throws to Player B, who controls and passes to Player
C. Player C picks up the ball and starts the sequence with a throw
to Player A or B (Figure 4.20).

44

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The players must keep the sequence: throw-control-pass-pick upthrow.

The player who picks the ball up may run with it before throwing.
This opens up the game by increasing space and time.

Turning With ttie Ball
All players, especially attackers, must be able to turn 180° with the ball.

This is one of the most important control skills. It is important in midfield, and it becomes crucial in attack. The sequence of movements used

when turning with the ball is shown in Figure 4.21.

Figure 4.21

The proper sequence for turning with the ball is to a) turn sideways to
receive the ball and offer a welcoming foot, b) cushion the ball on impact and
let it run on, and c) take the ball with the other foot.

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

45

THE BASIC PRACTICE

Figure 4.22

Equipment
1 ball for each 3 players.

Organization

Players are in teams of 3, standing in line at least 5 yards apart.
Instructions

Player A push passes to the central receiver. Player B, who controls
the ball, turns in one move, and passes the ball to Player C. Player

C returns the pass and the practice continues (Figure 4.22).
Coaching Points
Players should turn sideways to receive the ball and extend a wel-

coming foot to the ball.
Players should cushion the ball and withdraw the foot— this maintains the momentum on the ball— and take the ball on with the other
foot.

Coaching Progressions
Players turn and pass the ball to the receiver.
Players turn and drive with the instep to the receiver.
Players turn with the ball going between the feet.

Players develop the practice into shooting practices (chapter 10).

Ball Juggling
Ball juggling is an excellent way to encourage players to develop and re-

tain their feel for, and mastery over, the ball. The constant touching of

the ball develops finesse and confidence and encourages the use of many

46

Skills

and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

different parts of the body, especially the platforms, which are so impor-

tant in bringing the ball under control (Figure 4.23).

The secret of ball juggling is practice; because this is time consuming,
players must practice on their own time. (An inspiring example is Pele,
who as a boy had to use a grapefruit or a ball of rags tied together with
string.) To inspire additional practice, start every coaching practice with
a 1-minute competition to see who can achieve the most touches.

Figure 4.23
Ball juggling.

Drills for Beginners

Beginners do not have the ability to play the ball continuously; continued
failure becomes depressing and inhibits progress. To encourage success,
I

recommend using a light ball, such as a volleyball, and a method that

allows the ball to bounce on the floor while being played with the instep
of the foot.

BASIC BALL JUGGLING

Equipment
1 light ball for each player (a volleyball or a soccer ball at a reduced

pressure).

Organization

Individual players stand in free space.

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

47

Instructions

Players throw the ball into the air, let it bounce, and then play it
once with the instep.

Players try to keep the sequence going, that is, let the ball bounce,

play it with the instep, let it bounce again, and so on.

Coaching Points
Players should use the instep as a platform to lift the ball into the air.
starts to spin, players should stop and start over. (Spin
only complicates juggling for beginners.)
If the ball

Players should hold arms out wide for balance.

Coaching Progressions
Players make two touches with the instep for every bounce— play,
play, bounce, play, play, bounce,

and so on.

Players make three touches for every bounce.
Players score 10 touches before the sequence breaks down (professional players can reach several hundred).

Players try to use different platforms (e.g., forehead, thigh).
Players try to use the platforms in a sequence (e.g., head, thigh,
foot, thigh, head).

Players set self-targets and hold competitions.

Developing Ball Juggling Skills
Anyone who can consistently achieve 10 or more touches without losing
control is ready to move into the intermediate class. However, 1 do not
advocate simply achieving more and more touches or mastering the use
of body parts such as the shoulder or the back of the neck to catch the
ball.

Such skills are fine for the circus performer, but the soccer player

will benefit more from developing basic moves with the regular platforms

of the instep, thigh, and forehead. These moves are best learned in partner
activities and in moving situations.

Such situations as these are realistic

rather than contrived and encourage effective soccer skills.

Drills for Intermediates

Any player who can achieve 10 touches without losing control can attempt
the following partner practices.

48

Skills

and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

CONTINUOUS HEADING

Equipment
1 light ball for each 2 players (a volleyball or a soccer ball at a reduced

pressure).

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability, 3 yards apart.
Instructions

Player A gently lobs the ball to Player B, who heads the ball back;
the drill becomes continuous.

Coaching Points
Players' eyes should focus underneath the ball.
Players should hold arms outstretched to the side for balance.
Players should head the ball upward back to their partners.

Coaching Progressions
Players aim to reach 10 or more continuous plays.

THREE TOUCH

Equipment
1 light ball for each 2 players (a volleyball or a soccer ball at a reduced

pressure).

Organizations

Players are in pairs of equal ability, 3 yards apart.
Instructions

Players must play the ball at least 3 times before returning it to their
partners.

Coaching Points
Players should achieve height on the ball between touches to increase the time for each play.

Coaching Progressions
Players return the ball to their partners with either the foot or the

forehead.

Coaching Collecting and Controlling

49

Drills for Advanced Players
drills, the players remained relatively stationary. For
advanced juggling, the players have to move while they juggle. Players
start with individual activities and then move into partner practices.

In the previous

INDIVIDUAL ACTIVITIES

Equipment
1 ball for

each player.

Organization

Individual player stands in free space.
Instructions

Keeping the ball off the ground, players see how many yards they
can cover forward, backward, and sideways.
Coaching Points
Players should try to achieve height on the ball each time it is played.
Players should take plenty of time.

Coaching Progressions
Players start from a basic position and see how far they can travel.

Players set a given distance and see how quickly they can reach the
target and get back again.

PARTNER ACTIVITIES
Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability, 3 yards apart.
Instructions

Partners juggle the ball between each other while moving in the same
direction. Note that when one player advances, the other retreats.

Coaching Points

Same as for individual juggling activities.

50

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Coaching Progressions
Players touch the ball once only.
Players touch the ball at least twice before returning it to their
partners.

Players do not use the same part of the body twice in succession.

For ball control, see football tennis (head tennis) on p. 196.

(

1

52

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

As with many other sideways striking skills, such as the golf swing or the drives in tennis, a good
to the intended line of direction of the pass.

follow-through along the line of flight is essential. Unlike golf or tennis,
the backlift is relatively short; the power of the pass comes from the

muscles inside the thigh and from a firm, fixed ankle, which acts as a
club or hammer. While the pass can be made in a variety of ways, it is
best done with the player in a firm, compact stance with the center of
gravity low and the arms held low. The stance has been aptly called the

monkey stance to draw attention to the crouched body shape. The players
need to acquire the slightly sitting down position of the monkey. Figure
5.1 illustrates the sequence in detail.

Figure 5.

Sequence of proper body and foot positions for the pusti pass.

Faults

Four common faults in the basic technique are worth examining. With
the first fault the passing leg is kept rigid, often with the toe pointed.
This causes the leg to swing over and across the target line and slice the
ball. With the second fault the foot is raised but not held square to the
target line. This plays the ball wide of the target. With the third fault the
foot strikes the ball below its midline and causes it to lift, often with sidespin.

Such passes are really kicks and are difficult for the receiver to

control. With the fourth fault there is no follow-through. This causes a

stabbing action, which fails to produce the important top roll and causes
the pass to lose power.

Coaching Passing

53

Corrections

To correct all four faults, kneel at the feet of the player and guide his or
her foot through the correct pattern to give him or her the feel of the movement. This is called shaping (p. 196).

The Outside of the Foot Pass
This pass uses a different part of the foot than did the push pass and
also results in a different body shape. When using the outside of the foot,

the body is often tall and upright; indeed, it is almost stately as the ball
is guided past an opponent. Because of this body stance, however, this
pass is much less powerful than the push pass and is best used over short

distances and in tightly marked situations. Very often the ball is almost
flicked away, although always with a firm ankle (Figure 5.2).

Figure 5.2
Passing with the outside of the foot.

The Instep Pass
The instep pass is the most powerful of all the passes, as it uses the movement that produces the most powerful kick in soccer— the instep drive.
The pass can be used over long distances, but because of the need for
precise geometry between the instep and the ball, this pass is much more
difficult to learn. When used by beginners, the instep pass can be inaccurate, especially when compared to the much safer push pass (Figure
5.3).

54

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Figure 5.3
Passing with the instep.

Drills For Beginners

The following five drills are arranged in a progressive sequence. I recommend the first two drills for beginners; beginners can also progress further
through the sequence and can be introduced to the small-team games
presented in chapter 6. This will encourage the development of both the
basic techniques and the mental ability to play in realistic situations against
opposition, however simple these situations may be in the early stages.

STATIC PRACTICE

•

In the first drill the players are in a relatively static position. This simplifies matters for the players

and makes coaching easier.

Figure 5.4

Coaching Passing

55

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players; 1

marker for each pair plus 1 extra marker.

Organization

Players are in pairs, facing each other 8 to 10 yards apart.

Markers are set up about 6 feet apart to form passing lanes (Figure
5.4).

Instructions

Players pass the ball forward and backward to their partners using

only the push pass.
Players try to keep the pass within their lanes.
Players stop the ball before passing it back.

Coaching Points

Check the basic techniques (p. 51).
Encourage accuracy; the pass should go between the feet of the static
receiver.

Encourage a quality pass; the ball should hug the ground because
it has top roll. It should not bounce or have sidespin.
Coaching Progressions
Players increase the speed of the pass.
/

Players reduce the distance between the cones.
Players return the ball without stopping it first (i.e., one-touch play).

Players increase the distance of the pass to 10 to 12 yards.
Players return to the basic starting situation but use the outside and
instep techniques as variations.

PASSING ON THE MOVE— GIVE AND GO
Static practices help to introduce and develop the basic techniques, but
moving practices add realism. They also demonstrate to players the need
for accurate, properly weighted passes that hug the ground and have no

sidespin.

Figure 5.5

56

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Equipment
1 ball for

each 6 or 8 players.

Organization

Players are in 2 teams of 3 or 4, facing each other about 10 to 12

yards apart (Figure 5.5).
Instructions

Players use the push pass only.

Player A dribbles the ball forward a few feet, looks for Player Z,

and passes to him or her.
Player A then follows the pass and runs to the back of the opposite

team.

Meanwhile, Player Z dribbles forward, passes to Player B, and runs
to the back of the opposite team.

The drill becomes continuous.
Coaching Points
In the early stages of the practice, the players should control the
ball first, dribble a little,

and then look before they pass.

As they become more proficient, players should develop the quality
of passing in the following order: accuracy; proper weighting or force

(not too hard or too soft); proper ball position (on the ground, top
roll,

no sidespin).

Coaching Progressions
Players progress to one-touch control.
Players decrease the distance between each other.
Players increase the speed of the practice.

Drills for Intermediates

As players improve, the emphasis of coaching changes from basic techniques to finesse and maintaining skill while moving. Often the ability
to cope with an irregular bounce of the ball or an uneven surface is a sign
of improvement.

GIVE AND MOVE BACK

Equipment
1 ball for each 6 players.

Coaching Passing

B

57

C

Figure 5.6

Organization

Players are in 2 teams of 3, facing each other 2 yards apart (Figure
5.6).

Instructions

Player A passes to Player Z but then quickly retires to the back of
his or her own team.

Player Z passes to Player B and retires.

The drill becomes continuous.
Coaching Points
Players should develop one-touch passing as quickly as their ability
permits. Don't let them become discouraged if their early attempts
faU.
Insist on top roll; players will soon realize that sidespin makes control difficult.

Emphasize care and finesse; players should concentrate on and take
pride in every pass.

Coaching Progressions
The teams move closer and closer together. This makes the practice
really demanding and enjoyable.

WALL PASSING
Equipment
1 ball for each 6 or 8 players.

Organization

Players are in 2 teams of 3 or 4, facing each other at least 25 yards
apart.

7

58

X

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Y

z

Figure 5.

One player (Player W, who initially should be one of your better
players) stands halfway between the teams and to the side by about
5 yards, to give a good passing angle (Figure 5.7).

Instructions

Player A dribbles a few yards, passes to Player W, keeps running
to receive a return pass from Player W, collects the ball, dribbles,

and then passes to Player Z. Player A follows the pass to the back
of the opposite team.

Player Z repeats the sequence on the return.

The drill becomes

continuous.

Coaching Points
The sequence for the player with the ball is control, dribble, look,
pass.

Each player should observe this sequence because this is the sequence
that young players adopt in the game. You can encourage players
to look before they pass by asking Player
to move his or her

W

position.

Players should strive for accuracy and correct weighting.

Player

W should try to give an effective lead pass.

Coaching Progressions
All players take a turn as Player W.

Players increase the speed of the practice while trying to retain accu-

racy and control. This is an excellent practice to develop into a

shooting drill; the final pass becomes a shot on goal.

Coaching Passing

59

Drills for Advanced Players

The main objective is to keep both the passer and the receiver moving.
For this reason, most advanced practices involve active opposition; many
examples are included in this chapter and in chapter 6.

THE LAY-OFF OR ONE-TWO PASS

Z

C

Y

_

B

Figure 5.8

Equipment
1 ball for each 6 or 8 players.

Organization

Players are in 2 teams of 3 or 4, at least 25 yards apart, slightly set
off from the direct line (Figure 5.8).

Instructions

Player A has the ball.

On command. Players A and Z run toward each other.
Player A passes to Player Z, who gives an immediate one-touch
return to Player A.

Player A controls and passes to Player Y.
Players Y and B continue.

The drill becomes continuous.
Coaching Points
Players must realize that skillful cooperation is vital.

Player A should pass the ball accurately and firmly.

Player Z should move to meet the ball and should work to develop
a high degree of finesse.

X

60

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Coaching Progressions
This practice develops into a good shooting drill (chapter 10).
Players progress to one-touch control.

Basic Techniques of Long Passing
The techniques for long passing are identical to those for long kicking.
See chapter 9 for a full explanation of the necessary technical details plus

some coaching hints about the use of a kicking tee to help players kick
under the ball without striking the ground. However, this chapter does
include son^e advice on long passing plus two practices for intermediate
and advanced players. (Beginners should concentrate on short passing
and advance to long passing as their strength and technique improve.)

Drills for Intermediates

LONG PASSING

Figure 5.9

Equipment
1 ball for each

3 players.

Organization

Players are in teams of 3, in a line with at least 15 yards between
players, or they are on a coaching grid (Figure 5.9).

Coaching Passing

61

Instructions

The central player (Player B) has the ball. Player B rolls the ball to
one of the end players (Player A) who plays a long pass over the
head (or past) Player B to the far receiving player (Player C).
Player C controls the ball and returns it to Player B. The practice
is

repeated, with each of the two end players practicing the long

pass alternately.

Coaching Points
Player B must always give a quality pass to Players A and C. Such a
pass requires a quality rolling ball with good top roll and no spinning
or bouncing.
Players A and C should concentrate on playing an accurate long pass
that will land at the feet of the receiving player.

A and C must use a long-leg swing and follow-through. They
should kick under the ball to gain height and keep their heads down.

Players

Coaching Progressions
Player B tries to intercept the pass.
Players A and C pass directly to each other without Player B play-

ing the ball (i.e., 30-yard passing).
Players play the ball without stopping it first.

Passer tries to land the ball at the receiver's feet.
Players A and C use both feet. (The ability to play a long, accurate

pass with the weaker foot is the sign of a good player.)

Drills for Advanced Players
For advanced players we progress to moving drills and practices.

LONG LOFTED PASSING— ON THE MOVE
Equipment
1 ball for

each 3 players.

Organization

For groups of up to 12 players, players are in teams of 3 at one end
of a soccer field (Figure 5.10).

Players use the full width of the field.

For groups larger than 12 (24 maximum), create two smaller areas
by practicing across the field, allocating one group to each half.

62

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 5.10

Instructions

Player A, with the ball, moves forward and then crosses or centers
the ball to Player B.

Player B controls, moves the ball forward, and gives a long, lofted

pass to Player C.

The drill becomes continuous as the players move along the field.
Coaching Points
Players should toe down and hit through the bottom half of the ball
to make it rise.

Players should use a long swing of the kicking leg.
Players should develop high follow-through.

Players should lean away from the ball.
Players should keep the nonkicking foot well behind the ball.

Coaching Progressions
All 3 players move slowly up and down the field, controlling the
ball carefully before making the pass. Initially, the pass is made with

the stronger foot.

Coaching Passing

63

The player uses the foot that is farthest from the receiver (i.e., the
left foot when passing to the right and vice versa).
The players move at high speed down the field.
Players pass the ball with a first-time kicking movement (i.e., no

time is allowed to control and dribble before kicking).

Coaching the Mind of the Passer
Soccer players must think and act for themselves. In practices the coach
directs the kind of pass to be made; but in a game the player must decide.
To help players make correct decisions, create realistic game situations

for players, starting with the passer.

Creating Realistic Situations
Coaches can create realistic game situations by providing two essential
ingredients: opposition and supporting players.
We can then control these two ingredients according to the needs of
our players. For the same reasons that we do not take novice drivers onto
the freeway, we do not put beginning soccer players into situations that
do not provide a reasonable chance of success. We have to introduce
opposition gradually so the passer can develop the correct sequence of
actions: control, look,

and pass.

Drills for Beginners

The following is an excellent drill for coaching the beginner. It provides
a safety fence behind which young players can develop their confidence.

4 VS. 1

OUTSIDE THE SQUARE

Equipment
1 ball for each 5 players; 4 flags or cones.

Organization
Players are in teams of 5, each team on a 10 x 10 yard square marked

by flags or cones.

64

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 5.11

The defender (Player A) is in the square, with 1 attacker (Players
B, C, D, and E) on each side (Figure 5.11).
The defender is changed at intervals in rotation.
Instructions

The defender must remain within the square at all times and try
to intercept the pass.

The attackers may move sideways along their own lines, both with
and without the ball, to support each other. They may not step inside
the square.

The supporting attackers try to pass the ball across the square to
each other without interception by the defender.
Coaching Points
Because the attackers cannot be tackled, they must be taught to show
mastery over the ball and composure.

The attackers must lift their heads so they can read the situation.

The attackers must look for passing opportunities, or they must

move the ball sideways to create passing opportunities.
The attackers must execute quality passes.
Coaching Progressions

The player with the ball has unlimited time to demonstrate control
before making the pass.
Players waiting to receive a pass move sideways along their lines
to create passing opportunities.

The player with the ball tries to feint or disguise a pass.
Players use one-touch passing across the square.

Players pass to the player opposite, not just to those on each side.

Coaching Passing

65

Drills for Intermediates

The next drill is an obvious and challenging progression from the previous
drill.

2 VS. 4 OUTSIDE THE SQUARE

•""

66

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Coaching Progressions
Players use one-touch passing.
Players use more advanced passes with the instep and outside of

the foot; good players use swerve passes between and around

defenders.

While the practice is developing, you must move around the outside
of the square and coach from behind the players. In this way you can

speak quietly to players, reinforce good decisions, and see the same situation as the player, thus sharing the experience with him or her.

Keep

repeating the key words: control, look, pass.

Drills for Advanced Players

The previous two drills aid in coaching the mind of the passer. For advanced players we must now remove the safety fence between the attacker
and the defenders; this adds realism and demonstrates the difference
between passing directly to the feet of a supporting player and passing
into a space into which the receiver must move. Because we will become
increasingly dependent upon our supporting players, we will next consider how to coach the receivers. We will return to the coaching of
advanced players later in this chapter, in chapter 6, and in subsequent
chapters.

Coaching the Mind of the Receiver
A pass that goes astray or causes the receiver to lose possession is useless. The coach's problem is determining which player, if any, is respon-

sible for the mistake. Did the passer pass too hard, too soon, or too late,

or did the receiver fail to anticipate the developing situation?

We now

consider coaching the mind of the receiver; we will start by considering
an old soccer adage, "When not in possession, get into position."
Players who are not in possession of the ball should have only one
thought in their minds— support. With younger players you might also
use the word help. Help is a friendly term, and questions like, "Chris,
where can you go to help?" get the message across. Impress upon players
that willingness to help is essential for good teamwork. Often players
have to make many unselfish runs without ever receiving a pass. The
willingness to keep on running for the sake of the team is at the heart
of every successful team; this spirit cannot be fostered too soon.
If players have the right attitude, how can coaches help them to make
correct judgments about where to support, and show them how and when
to move into position?

Coaching Passing

67

Where to Support
Basically, the supporting player can take only two positions: behind or
in front of the player with the ball. To make the right decision between
moving behind or going ahead of the player in possession of the ball,
your player must read the situation. If the player with the ball is closely
covered and does not have space to play the ball forward, then the

supporting player should go behind. If the player with the ball does have
space to play the ball forward, then the supporting player should run
hard and go in front.
This is a relatively simple decision to make, providing players can recognize these situations.

Problem I

The attacker (Player Z) is prevented by the defenders (Players A, B, and
C) from playing the baU forward. Player Z needs help.
The Solution— Go Behind

Support players need to help Player Z by moving into the shaded area
shown (Figure 5.13). If Player Z then plays the ball back, the support
players will be able to play the ball forward.

*

c

Figure 5.13
Support by going behind.

Problem II

The attacker (Player Z) has the ball with ample space to play the ball
forward.
If Player Z dribbles the ball forward, he or she may commit the defender
(Player A). But the longer Player Z dribbles, the longer the move is delayed

and the more the ability to play the ball forward is lost. Player Z needs
help.

68

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 5. 14
Support by going in front.

The Solution— Go In Front

Support players must, in this case, run toward and take up attacking positions behind Player A (e.g., into the shaded areas shown in Figure 5.14).
Player Z can now play the ball forward into positions behind Player A.

Safe Passing Angles
All players must know what is meant by a safe passing angle. Basically,
this is a matter of geometry.

For example, if the attacker (Player A) is

covered by the defender (Player Z) and does not have the space to play
the ball forward, the safe passing angle is backward and away from the
defender (Figure 5.15).

Figure 5. 15
Safe passing angle for a tigtitly marked attacker.

Alternatively,

if

Player A is not tightly marked and does have space

to play the ball forward, then the safest and best pass can be made for-

ward, past the defender at a 45° angle (Figure 5.16).

Coaching Passing

69

Figure 5.16
Safe passing angle for an open attacker.

The safest position of all is usually at an angle of about 45° The square or
sideways pass is always risky because if the defender intercepts it, then at
least two players are caught out of position— the passer and the intended
receiver. Consider the players in Figure 5.17.
.

©
o

Figure 5.17

A square pass by A is intercepted by Z.
Player A has the ball, but because he or she is contained by the defender
(Player Y), Player A tries to make a square pass to Player B.

Player Z moves forward quickly and intercepts the pass. At this moment. Players A and B are both caught out of position, and other team

members, who should have been moving forward in support, are also
likely caught out of position. Worse, the opposition has the initiative, and
both Players Y and Z can move forward and attack with confidence.

70

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

In Figure 5.17, Player A has at least three safer alternatives: make a
much more positive attempt to beat Player Y, play a killer pass between
Players Y and Z for Player B, or receive support from behind Player B.
This final alternative requires Player B to know how and where to move,

which concerns receiver strategies.

How and Where to Move
Always be prepared to spend time showing your players both how and
where to move. Three basic moves are the curved run, diagonal run, and
blindside run.

The Curved Run
Here the player moves on a wide, circular arc that takes him or her out
of sight and away from the defender and also increases the target for the
passer (Figure 5.18).

Figure 5.18

The curved run.

The Diagonal Run
With this run the player moves diagonally across the field of play. Such
a movement, providing the player doesn't run offside, increases penetration and gives a better target for the passer (Figure 5.19).

Coaching Passing

71

Figure 5.19

The diagonal run.

The Blindside Run
The other popular name for this move is the backdoor run. The object
of the run is to take advantage of the unsighted defender by moving unseen behind his or her line of vision. Such a run increases penetration
and provides the passer with an easier target (Figure 5.20).

Figure 5.20

The blindside run or backdoor run.

Drills for Beginners

For coaching receivers I recommend games that involve three attackers
against one defender— even for beginners. The reason is that using 4 vs. 1

72

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

1 results in the four receivers standing statically in the four corners and

simply passing the ball. This defeats the object of teaching the receivers
to think and move for themselves in relation to the movement of other

players.

3 VS. 1

PIGGY IN THE MIDDLE

Figure 5.21a

Equipment
1 ball for each 4 players;

4 flags or cones.

Organization

Players are in groups of 4 (3 attackers, 1 defender), each group in
a 15

X 15 yard square marked by flags or cones.

Instructions

The attackers have to pass the ball and keep it away from the
defender (Figure 5.21a). They are given a target (e.g., 10 passes).

When the defender intercepts the ball, he or she changes place with
one of the attackers, possibly in rotation.
Coaching Points

Remember that you are coaching the receivers, not the passer.
The receivers should look for and move into the spaces either behind
or in front of the passer.

The receivers should try to present safe passing angles.

Coaching Passing

73

The players should practice unselfish running.
Players should continually reassess their best supporting position
in relation to the movements of the passer, the defender, the ball,

and other supporting players. Each player's key thoughts should
be, "Where, when, and how do I support?"
Coaching Progressions

To emphasize movement off the ball by the receivers, players start
by playing basketball but quickly change to soccer.
Use the playback system to highlight a good move by a receiver
(chapter 17).
If the players are not doing well,

wait until one or both supporting

players are caught in bad supporting positions and then, by using the

double positive approach (chapter 2) and the playback system, explain
the following: Player A has the ball. Players B and C are in bad positions because neither can receive a pass from Player

A (Figure 5.21a).

Figure 5.21b

Now using a positive opening comment, such as, "You are run," show the players what is wrong, or let them
you what is wrong, and restart the game with a correct move

ning hard but
tell

.

.

.

and pass. For example. Player B can make a simple blindside run
to a position at a 45° angle to the passer (Figure 5.21b).

Let Player B move into his or her new and correct supporting position. Now let Player A make a correct pass to Player B; when the
ball reaches Player B, the game restarts. I often use this method of

74

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 5.21c

restarting a practice— it helps reinforce the importance of the receiver

moving into position (Figure 5.21c).
Players change to more advanced situations with more players (e.g.,

3 vs. 2).

Drills for Intermediate and Advanced Players
Drills for intermediate and advanced players require either more players

or a changed ratio between attackers and defenders. For example, you

can increase the drill to 4 attackers versus 2 defenders or even 4 attackers
versus 3 defenders; these situations make it much harder for the receivers
to find space and support the passer. Outnumbering the attackers provides even more challenge (e.g., 4 defenders versus 3 attackers). In this
situation the attackers really have to work hard to become good receivers.
A whole range of small-team games are presented in chapter 6. This chapter presents one final activity for advanced players, which has proved
very successful at the college level. It is a one-on-one situation in which
the attacker tries to make and receive passes from four static passers.

CORNER-TO-CORNER PRACTICE
This practice is demanding, both physically and mentally.

Coaching Passing

75

Figure 5.22

Equipment
3 balls for each 6 players; 4 flags or cones; pinnies.

Organization
Players are in teams of 6, each team in a 20 x 20 yard square marked

by flags or cones (Figure 5.22).
Instructions

A player stands in each corner; 3 of these players have a ball. The
fourth player does not have a ball and acts as the first receiver.

None of the comer players may move more than 2 yards in any direction from their corner.

Of the two players in the square, one is designated the attacker
(Player Y) and one the defender (Player Z).

On command. Player Y has to move about the inside of the square,
collect a pass from any of the 3 corner players with a ball, and then,

by moving and dribbling, find a way of avoiding Player Z and
delivering a successful pass to the corner player without a ball. If

the pass reaches Player X successfully, then Player Y immediately
moves back into the middle of the square and invites a pass from

one of the two remaining players with a ball (he or she may not
get a return pass from Player X). Having received this pass. Player
Y must again try to avoid Player Z and deliver a successful pass to
the player without a ball.

Coaching Points
Concentrate on the attacker, not the defender.

76

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Show Player Y how to create space by moving away from the
defender with sudden changes of speed or direction.
Receiving player should go to meet the ball.
Attackers should screen the ball to create time and space.
Players should show composure and avoid panic.

Attacker should see which corner is free before collecting the ball.

Having made one pass, attackers should move immediately and
quickly to receive another.

Coaching Progressions
The defender assumes a passive role to allow the attacker to learn
the drill.

The defender becomes more aggressive as the attacker improves.

The defender forces the attacker to receive a pass from the corner
farthest from the open corner.
The attacker plays continuously for up to 2 minutes.

CHAPTER 6

Passing Games
Previous chapters discussed the passer, the receiver, and the techniques
of passing. In real games, the successful combination of all three of these

elements is the hallmark of good play. An excellent way to combine these
elements in practice is through use of small-team games, which involve
both opposition and supporting players and which, when we want to
focus on a particular skill, can be conditioned to highlight a desired outcome. (Conditioning means imposing rules to suit our own objectives.
For example, we may require one-touch control, require all passes to be
kept below knee height, or not allow players to tackle. The conditions
we can impose are limitless; their usefulness lies in allowing us to focus
attention on a specific skill or desired outcome.)

The Enjoyment Factor
The second advantage of using small-team games is what I call the enjoyment factor. I have learned through experience that in any sport, players
enjoy practice more when it resembles a full-game situation that allows
them to express their own skills and talents without the restriction of the
coach. Conversely, the coach wants to influence the thoughts and actions
of the players to ensure that they learn and improve. Small-team games
offer a very useful compromise; they are an invaluable stepping stone
between those twin objectives— learning and enjoyment. These games
act as a bridge between learning skills and tactics and applying them in
the full-game situation. Acquiring new skills can be physically demanding, repetitive, and exhausting. What really matters is that the players
77

78

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

experience a feeling of genuine satisfaction by the end of the session—
that they work toward an improvement, however small. Small-team
games provide a very useful vehicle to this objective.

ControUing Your Practices
The following games offer a variety of purposeful and enjoyable activities
from beginners to advanced players. However, remember my second
strategy— coach the players, not the drill. Always be prepared to modify
a game according to how well or how badly the players are responding.

you make the game too easy you bore the players; if you make it too
hard the players won't improve. The following tips will help you control
your games.
If the practice is too hard (it keeps breaking down), increase the size
of the playing area, remove some of the players, change the balance of
the teams (e.g., change 3 vs. 3 to 4 vs. 2), or modify the rules.
If

If the practice is too easy,

decrease the size of the playing area, introduce

more players, change the balance of the teams (e.g., change 3 vs. 3 to
4 vs. 2 but coach the 2 players), or modify the rules.
You can easily and effectively develop small-team games into attack

versus defense situations and advanced teamwork practices. For this

reason I consider these games important in providing stepping stones
to successful team play.

Games For Beginners
Small-team competitive games are the stepping stones to successful team
play. Frequent use of these games develops individual skills in realistic
situations. The games provide the basis for introducing the principles of

successful team play (chapter 14) and of improving tactics and teamwork

(chapters 17 and 18). The games in this section are appropriate for begin-

ning players.

SOCCER BASEBALL
designed soccer baseball for younger players to emphasize that a good
pass has to be both accurate and forceful. Soccer baseball is also enjoy-

1

able for older players.

Passing Games

79

Figure 6.

Equipment
1 ball for 8 players; 4 flags or cones.

Organization

Players of equal ability are in 2 teams of 4, each team on a 10 x 10

yard square marked by flags or cones.
Instructions

The fielding team places one player on each base (Players A, B, C,
and D). On the command "go," these players (starting with Player
A) pass the ball around the outside of the bases and back to Player
A. The batting team players (Players W, X, Y, and Z) stand at the
corner of the square near Player A. On the command "go," the
batter (Player
in Figure 6.1) sprints around the square in the direction opposite the path of the ball. A run is scored if the batter gets

W

back to the home base before the ball. Each player has one turn and
then the teams change. Any number of innings can be played. If
the batter touches the ball or a player when running, he or she is out.
Coaching Points
Batters should run quickly but also watch where the ball is. Fielders
should pass carefully and accurately.
Fielders should aim at the feet of the receiver.
Fielders should try to give a quality pass— firm, fast, and with top
roll to

the feet of the receiver.

80

and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Skills

Coaching Progressions
The batters run are^und the square twice to score a home run. (This
is

good training!)

The batters run once around the bases while dribbling a soccer ball,
and the fielding team passes the ball both clockwise and counterclockwise around the bases.
The batters, instead oi dribbling around the bases, dribble in and
out of 4 cones arranged as shown in Figure 6.2. The number of cones
for the dribbling team varies according to the ability of the plavers.

4 A

Figure 6.2

Games for Intermediates
The following small-team games progressively increase the physical and
mental demands made upon the players.

5 VS. 2

Equipment
1

ball for 7 players;

4 flags or cones; pinnies.

Passing Games

81

Figure 6.3

Organization

Players are in teams of 7 (5 attackers, 2 defenders), each team in
a 30 X 20 yard rectangle marked by flags or cones or in of the penalty

area (Figure 6.3).
Instructions

Defenders keep possession and make as many successful passes as
possible.

Players change roles at intervals.

Coaching Points
This practice is an excellent starting point from which to develop
team play. The generous ratio of attackers to defenders makes it
fairly easy for players to combine successfully and produce effec-

tive passes. (With young players, you may have to make the practice even easier by changing to 6 vs. 1,

thus giving even more time

and space in which to think and act.)
It is

also a good idea to act as one of the defenders yourself. Your

joining in always stimulates players and ensures that the weaker
players are helped even further. For example, you can control the
situation in their favor by moving towards them, but not actually

tackling— that is, offer passive resistance.

Coaching Progressions
Players must pass below knee height.
Players are limited to 3 touches before passing.
Players develop specific passes (e.g., a killer pass or one-touch
passing).

82

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

4 VS. 2

Figure 6.4

Equipment
1 ball for 6 players; 4 flags or cones; pinnies.

Organization

Players are in teams of 6 (4 attackers, 2 defenders), each team in
a 20

X 20 yard square marked by flags or cones (Figure 6.4).

instructions

Attackers try to retain possession of the ball and attempt to score

predetermined number of passes or hold the ball for a predetermined number of minutes.
a

Defenders try to win possession.
Players change roles at intervals.

Coaching Points

The passer should show composure and look for the opportunity
to pass.

The receiver should make space to receive the pass.
The passer should have 2 players at good supporting angles. Weak
passers should continue to serve as attackers until they improve.

Coaching Progressions

The player in possession screens the ball (chapter 7), and the players
not in possession work hard mentally to give good support.
Players achieve longer and longer periods of interpassing without
losing possession.

The passer uses a killer pass or screens the ball until passing opportunities arise.

Passing Games

83

Games for Advanced Players
In all small-team games it is important to demand high standards from
your players. Insisting on a good response becomes increasingly important
when coaching advanced players in small-team situations; realism and
a competitive edge are vital ingredients.

3 VS. 2

Figure 6.5

Equipment
1 ball for 5 players; 4 flags or cones; pinnies.

Organization

Players are in teams of 5 (3 attackers, 2 defenders), each team in
a 20 X 20 yard square marked by flags or cones or in the center circle
(Figure 6.5).
Instructions

The game starts with the attackers in possession.
The attackers try to retain possession or make a specified number
of passes.

The defenders try to win possession with, and without, tackling.
Coaching Points

The passer should strive for increased control of the ball— encourage
screening, feinting, and dribbling.
Receivers should develop blindside moves.

84

Skills

and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Coaching Progressions

One of the 3 attackers is designated a floater. When the defenders
win the ball, the floater moves over to their side and those 3 players
then become the attackers. Each player is designated "floater" in
sequence; in this way all players get to practice passing.
Players must use a specific type of pass (e.g., outside of the foot
only, or two-touch control).

An Interesting Variation
To easily change from small-team practice to an advanced tactical
or team practice, we simply move this activity to the area just outside the penalty area (Figure 6.6). The 3 attackers now must beat
the 2 defenders by maneuvering the player with the ball into the
penalty area; this player finishes with a shot at the goal.

Passing Games

85

Players must observe the offside rule.

Coach starts the practice with different kinds of serves— lofted,
ground pass, or volley pass.

Larger Game Situations

We now move into larger game situations, which require increasing
mental and technical skills and, because they are played on a larger area,
become more similar to the full-game situation. Larger game situations
require individual responses from the players, who increasingly must
think for themselves. A good example is the next game, called Goalkeeper
(Figure 6.7).

GOALKEEPER

Figure 6.7

Equipment
1 ball for

12 players; pinnies.

Organization

Players are in 2 teams of equal number and ability (e.g., 6 vs. 6)

on 1/2 of a soccer field.

86

Skills

and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Instructions
Start the game with a throw. The team that fails to gain possession
must immediately put 1 player in their goal (usually the nearest

player to goal). When ball possession changes, so does the goalkeeper. Thus the game always involves 1 goalkeeper plus 5 vs. 6. The

team in possession always has the extra field player. In Figure 6.7,
Players A to F have possession and Players U to Z have a goalkeeper.

Coaching Points
Teach the players to see the breakdown point (i.e., when the ball
changes possession) and to react accordingly:
Attackers become defenders and have to close down quickly on
their opponents or position themselves between the ball and their

own goal.
Defenders become attackers and must move away from their opponents and look for spaces behind the defense or go wide.
Players should think for themselves.
Players should realize the importance of keeping possession.

Coaching Progressions
Players observe certain conditions, such as the offside rule or use
of two touch control.

FOUR-GOALS GAME
Equipment
Four sets of small goals; ample soccer balls to aid continuous play.
Organization

Players are in small teams of equal size and ability (e.g., 7 vs. 7)

on a half-sized soccer field with goals arranged as shown in Figure
6.8. Each team has 2 goalkeepers.
Instructions

Play progresses as for soccer, but players cannot be offside or score
in the same goal twice in succession.

Players change roles at intervals.

Coaching Points

Do not overcoach.
Players should discover for themselves what to do when they have
to defend 2 goals or attack 2 goals.

Passing Games

87

Figure 6.8

Coach individual players in mental skills and the art of reading the
game.
Coaching Progressions
Attackers try to switch their attack quickly by using longer passes.

Defenders try to contain the attackers in a small area and prevent
a direct shot at goal.

When the ball changes possession or is thrown into play by a
goalkeeper, attackers try to look for open spaces while defenders

move to cover and mark attackers in dangerous positions.

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

FLOATER

Figure 6.9

Equipment

Ample soccer balls; 4 flags or cones; pinnies, plus special colored
pinny for the floater.
Organization

Players are in 2 teams of 2 to 7 players with 1 floater, in a square

playing area marked by flags or cones (Figure 6.9). (Allow a miniof 10 square yards for each player; for example, 7 players need

mum

70 yards, or a 30 x 40 yard square.)
Instructions

The floater always plays for the team in possession of the ball. When
the ball changes possession, the floater changes side.

Teams try to make use of the floater and benefit from the extra
player.

No goalkeepers (players who can use their hands) are used in this
game, but players can and should defend the goal.

Passing Games

89

Coaching Points

When players gain possession they should use their extra player
by moving out into wider, more open spaces and being prepared
to run with the ball until they attract at least 1 or more defenders
and can release the pass. This should create more space for the new
receiver of the ball.

Coaching Progressions
Introduce goals (e.g., corner posts 2 yards apart). This immediately
adds the problem of direction to the game.
Players must observe the offside rule.

CHAPTER 7

Coaching Dribbling
Close dribbling to beat an opponent is probably the most exciting of all
the skills of soccer. Like all skills it can be learned and improved, but
dribbling is also an art, and players of outstanding ability always possess
a natural flair or talent.

The best way to coach players to dribble is to present situations that
teach the basics of dribbling but also create opportunities for the players
to act and think for themselves. For this reason, this chapter contains four
sections, each offering advice on the techniques of dribbling that are

appropriate for beginning, intermediate, and advanced players. Each section recommends practices that allow players to demonstrate their own
abilities

and skills.

Coaching Beginners
Beginners have to develop a sense of touch and control. Often, beginners
kick the ball forward and run after it. To correct this, they must learn
how to play the ball forward gently with a relaxed foot.

Drills For Beginners

The next six practices encourage these skills and provide a rich variety
of activities that will act as a springboard for many other games and activities of your

own design.

91

92

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

MAKE FRIENDS WITH THE BALL

Figure 7.1

Equipment
1 ball for each player.

Organization
Players are in a group of unlimited number in a designated area (e.g.,

the center circle) (Figure 7.1).
Instructions

Players take the ball for a walk, jog, or run, keeping it as close to
their feet as possible.

Coaching Points
Players should touch the ball gently. Using the big toe or little toe,
players push the ball and relax the foot.

Coaching Progression

The players respond to the coach's whistle or call to start and stop
the ball. Players increase the tempo of the game.

FOLLOW THE LEADER 1

Figure 7.2

Coaching Dribbling

93

Equipment
1 ball for each

player.

Organization

Players face the coach (Figure 7.2).
Instructions

Players mimic the coach's moves.

Coaching Points
Players should achieve a low center of gravity, with the body slightly
crouched and weight evenly balanced.
Players should use the inside and outside of the foot to change direction sideways.

Players should use the sole of the foot to pull the ball backwards.

Coaching Progressions

Coach increases the tempo of the movement.
Coach fakes moves by lifting the foot over the ball.

FOLLOW THE LEADER 2

Figure 7.3

Equipment
1 ball for each player.

Organization

Players stand in a line (Figure 7.3).
Instructions

Players mimic the actions and follow the pathways of the coach.

Coaching Points
Players should keep the ball close and hold their arms out sideways
for balance.

Players should be alert to rapid changes of speed and direction.

94

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Coaching Progressions
Players walk, then jog slowly, then move in different directions and
at different speeds.

ZIG ZAG GAME 1

Figure 7.4

•

Equipment
1 ball for

each player; up to 5 cones.

Organization

Players are in teams of 3. Cones are set at 5-yard intervals (Figure
7.4).

Instructions

Going one at a time, players use different methods of controlling
the ball between and around the cones.

Coaching Points
Players should touch the ball as often as possible and avoid the kickand-run.
Players should keep the ball close.

Coaching Progressions
Players increase the tempo of the dribbles.
Players engage in simple relays and competitions between players

and between teams.

Coaching Dribbling

95

Coach reduces the gap between the cones, and players repeat
progressions.

BALL DANCING

Figure 7.5

Equipment
1 ball for each player.

Organization

Players are in a designated area (e.g., the center circle).
Instructions

Using alternate feet, the player touches or taps the top of the ball
with the underneath of his or her toes (Figure 7.5).
Coaching Points
Players should tap or touch the ball gently and continuously— like
running in place— to develop a rhythn:\.
Players should hold their arms out for balance.

Coaching Progressions
Players apply pressure when touching the ball to make it roll gently
backward.
Players make the ball go forward, sideways, or in the pattern of a
square.

Players make other patterns, such as their initials.

96

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

SHIP AND LIFEBOAT

Lifeboat

Figure 7.6

Equipment
1 ball for each player;

4 flags or cones.

Organization

Players stand in a line with about 2 yards between each player. On
either side of the line of players is a parallel line, marked by flags

or cones; these 2 lines are about 10 yards apart. One is designated

the ship; the other is the lifeboat. (Figure 7.6).
Instructions

On the command "ship" or "lifeboat," players dribble their balls
to the correct line.

On the command "freeze," they put a foot on the ball and stop
On the command "goalkeeper," they fall on the ball and pull it
it.

toward their chests.
Coaching Points
Players should keep the ball close.
Players should stay alert and listen carefully to the calls.

Coaching Progressions
Coach sharpens players' wits by calling "ship" when players are
already on the ship, or "freeze" when they are already still.

Coaching Dribbling

97

Coach changes calls with increasing rapidity.
Coach makes the game an elimination— the last to respond is out.
(Don't eliminate players too quickly, as they won't enjoy the game

and gain skills by watching!)

Coaching Intermediates
Thought processes are the main difference between the beginner and the
intermediate player. For the beginner, just thinking about the ball is challenge enough, but intermediate players should be able to divide their
attention between the ball and what is going on around them. This skill
is further developed as players improve.

Drills for Intermediates
This section includes two drills for intermediate players.

THE DRIBBLING PEN

Figure 7.7

Equipment
1 ball for each player.

Organization
Players are divided into two groups— a working group and a resting
and watching group. They are divided because, done properly, this

98

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

is

a strenuous activity.

Soccer

(On cold days everyone works.)

Players move freely within a designated area (e.g., center circle)
(Figure 1.1).
Instructions

Players keep the ball close to their feet; they don't kick and follow.
Players stay alert to commands and keep their heads up as much
as possible.

Coaching Points— Control
In stop-start practices, players should use the sole of the foot to stop

the ball.
Players should relax the foot that is playing the ball and develop
gentle control.

Players should not kick and follow but should try to finesse the ball.

Players should use the sole of the foot to drag the ball backward
to make space in front.

Players should develop combination moves and sequences.

Coaching Points— Peripheral Vision

Ask the players how far ahead they can look but still see the ball
at their feet using peripheral vision.

Players should see the ball while staying aware of surrounding
action,

such as where the opponents are and how much space is

between them.
Repeat all of the practices for control, emphasizing use of peripheral
vision.

Increase the tempo of the practice, encouraging players to look for

and move into open space.
Players should develop an awareness of how far ahead they can

move the ball according to the proximity of other players.
Coaching Points— Change of Pace and Direction
Players should move freely about the zone in all directions, not just
forward.
Players should change pace and direction when playing the ball with

the front foot whUe driving off the rear; the inside and outside of
the foot; and the sole of the foot while pulling the ball backward

away from danger.
Players should use feints and fakes, exaggerating the fake by using
the eyes, head, shoulders, and arms, by taking the body over the
line of the ball,

and by moving the foot over the ball.

Progress the practice by introducing opposition and developing confidence in the players.

Coaching Dribbling

99

5 VS. 2

Figure 7.8

Equipment
1 ball for each attacker; 1 pinny for each defender.

Organization

Players are in groups of 5 or 6, with 1 or 2 defenders according to
ability of players. Players

stand in the center circle (Figure 7.8).

Defenders wear pinnies.
Instructions

Defenders try to win the ball or play it out of the circle.
Attackers try to keep possession.

Coaching Points
Players should be aware of the whole situation— the position of their
ball, the other attackers, and the defender. Players should keep their
heads up.

When confronted by a defender (who might be passive in the early
stages), the attacker should try to beat him, not just turn away and

screen the ball for safety.
Players should try to use and gain confidence in the techniques you

have taught them previously.
Coaching Progressions
Each player has a ball. On command, players keep close control of
their own ball while trying to cause other players to lose control of
their ball. The last player in the circle is the winner, or players score
a point each time they touch somebody else's ball, with the highest
scorer the winner.

100

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The Transition From Intermediate to Advanced
Real dribbling means taking on and beating an opponent, or better still
several opponents! For this reason I base my advanced drills on 1 vs. 1
situations, but I believe there is a useful transition stage when introducing

opposition.

For this transition, I recommend some drills that include a safety fence
to allow players to develop the all-important qualities of composure and

peripheral vision.

THE SAFETY FENCE

Figure 7.9

Equipment
1 ball for 2 players; 2 flags or cones.

Organization

Players are in evenly matched pairs (1 attacker, 1 defender), facing

each other across a 10-yard line marked by flags or cones (a gridsystem line is ideal) (Figure 7.9).
Instructions

The attacker has the ball and moves in different directions trying
to avoid the defender. The defender has to react and keep his or
her body directly opposite the attacker.

Coaching Dribbling

101

Neither the players nor the ball must cross the line. The attacker
is successful

when he or she can reach one end of the line after losing

the defender.

Coaching Points
Players should try to drag the ball with the inside of the foot.
Players should lift the foot over the ball when faking moves and

when changing direction with the outside of the foot.
Players should use vigorous body movements to fake changes of
direction.

Players should practice faking by pointing in one direction but going

the other.

Coaching Progressions
Players must work within a time limit. The attacker practices all the

above moves with his or her back to the defender; this is also an
introduction to screening (p. 110).

LONDON BRIDGE
This drill is a simple start to beating a defender that highlights the essential ingredients of successful dribbling.

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in evenly matched pairs (1 bridge,

1 attacker).

Instructions

One player acts as the bridge, standing with feet wide apart.
The attacker dribbles the ball forward, slips it through the bridge's
legs, and collects it on the other side (Figure 7.10).
Coaching Points
This practice ensures that the attacking players keep their heads up
while approaching the bridge and develop a good sense of touch
as the ball is played forward in small, controlled touches.
Players also develop a sense of timing and accuracy as they slip the
how to accelerate past the defender

ball through the bridge and learn

once the ball has been played forward.

The attacker should not kick the ball through the bridge and chase
after it.

Try to get the player to collect the ball 2 to 3 feet behind

the bridge.

102

SkUls and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Dribble forward

Slip through the legs

Collect behind defender

Figure 7.10

Coaching Dribbling

103

Encourage approaching with the ball played with front foot, the ball
dragged with rear foot, and the ball played with both feet.
Coaching Progressions

The player acting as the bridge does jumping jacks to open and close
the gap. The attacker must time the move through the gap; this is
both realistic and enjoyable.

The bridge backs off slowly as the attacker approaches, using the
correct jockeying footwork (i.e., 1 foot forward and back, at an angle
to the player).

When the bridge is ready, he or she uses a small jump to reposition
the feet from the correct sideways jockeying position to the incorrect

square position (jumps the feet square) and thus "invites" the
attacker through (Figure 7.11). The bridge must help the attacker
by making a definite jump square. This teaches the attacker to look
and be patient and develops his or her confidence to hold the ball.
This is very good practice for the attacker.

"Bridge" jumps square

• ••

Attacker

goes

5—7

/^"Bridge" backs off

through

Figure 7.11

Coaching Advanced Dribbling
Skillful dribbling is a mixture of flair, composure, and practice; I feel that

dribbling is really an art form. All good dribblers employ five basic moves
at some stage; these are well worth examining in detail.

The methods

are showing the ball, pretending to kick, creating space with the ball, for-

cing the defender off balance, and screening around the defender.

104

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

SHOWING THE BALL

Figure 7.12

Equipment
1 ball for 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 attacker, 1 defender).
Instructions

Defender backs off as attacker brings the ball toward him or her using
the foot (Figure 7.12).

Coaching Points
Attacker should present the ball to the defender in a manner that
invites a tackle. As the defender lunges forward to strike, the attacker

should play the ball past the defender or through his or her legs.
Coaching Progressions
the defender helps the attacker by making exaggerated,
clumsy strikes. As the attacker improves, the defender becomes
Initially,

more controlled. Eventually the attacker takes the ball directly
toward the defender so that he or she is committed to tackle.

PRETENDING TO KICK
Equipment
1 ball for 2 players.

Coaching Dribbling

105

Figure 7.13

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 attacker, 1 defender).
Instructions

Attacker takes the ball directly toward the defender at a controlled

speed and pretends to kick it hard at the defender (Figure 7.13).
Coaching Points

The attacker should make a vigorous fake kick at the ball with an
upward lift of the head. This action must be sufficiently frightening
to produce a reflex action in the defender, who should think that

the ball is going to hit him or her. Few defenders will not rise up
onto their toes away from the ball and shield their head. Some

defenders will even jump up into the air!

Coaching Progressions

The attacker brings the ball in fairly quickly at the defender, fakes
the kick, and then pushes forward and sideways off the rear foot.

The defender cooperates at first and gives the desired reaction. As
the attacker improves, the defender reacts normally— he or she may
still

jump!

CREATING SPACE BY MOVING THE BALL
Equipment
1 ball for 2 players.

106

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Drag the ball sideways to create space.

Place the foot over the ball.

Accelerate past the defender.

Figure 7.14

Coaching Dribbling

107

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 attacker,

1

defender).

Instructions

Attackers cannot expect good defenders to jump out of the way,
but the attacker can move the defender sideways out of position
to create space through which to dribble. One way to do this is by

moving the ball and making the defender follow.
The defender has to move over as the attacker drags the ball to the
left

with the inside of the right foot (Figure 7.14a).

The attacker draws the defender even further across and gets closer
to him or her (Figiire 7.14b).

The attacker now lifts his or her right foot over the ball (Figure 7.14c).

The attacker pushes the ball with the outside of the right foot past
the defender and through the gap that has been created by moving
the ball and the defender (Figure 7.14d and e).

FAKING AND MOVING THE BODY
TO GET THE DEFENDER OFF BALANCE

Equipment
1 ball for 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 attacker, 1 defender).
Instructions

The attacker uses body feints and disguises his or her intentions
so that the defender makes a wrong move and gets off balance. For
example, the defender transfers his or her weight to the foot that
is nearest to the ball, which should have been left free to tackle.
Tennis players call this "having your foot in a hole."

Method 1.
ball,

The attacker fakes to go right, lifts his or her foot over the
and goes left by pushing the ball with the inside of the right foot

(Figure 7.15).

Method 2.

The attacker drags the ball to the left, using his or her right

foot. The attacker pretends to stop (as if to move in the opposite direc-

tion) but then continues left by dragging the ball with the inside of the

right foot (Figure 7.16).

The attacker makes a bold feint by stepping completely over
the top of the ball with the front foot and then plays the ball forward
from behind with the back foot (Figure 7.17).

Method 3.

108

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 7.15

Method 1

Moves left
(Cont.)

Figure 7.16

Method 2

Coaching Dribbling

Fakes right

109

But goes left

Figure 7.16 (Continued)

Plays forward with rear foot

Foot over ball

Accelerate past

Figure 7.17

Method 3

110

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

SCREENING AROUND OR ROLLING AROUND THE DEFENDER

Figure 7.18

Equipment
1 ball for 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 attacker, 1 defender).
Instructions

The attacker moves the ball toward the defender and then turns his
or her back to the defender and makes a wide screen (Figure 7.18a).
The attacker drags the ball around in a circle and uses the screen
to roll around the defender. The attacker has now moved around
the defender and can make progress or release a shot (Figure 7.18b).

Drills for Advanced Players

The following drills can be used to develop the five basic moves in dribbling. The drills should be used in conjunction with the small-team conditional games explained in chapter 6. Coaching points are not included
in this section because the player chooses which method to try; the coach
should advise after the attempt.

Coaching Dribbling

111

ATTACKING THE SQUARE

Figure 7.19

Equipment
4 balls for 8 players; 4 flags or cones.

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 attacker, 1 defender). Each
pair stands on 1 side of a 10 x 10 yard square marked by flags or

cones (Figure 7.19).
Instructions

Defenders stand 5 yards from the line. They may retreat as they are
attacked but they must not move back over the line.
Attackers start 10 yards away from defenders; to beat the defenders,
attackers must keep possession of the ball and take it into the square.
(This final point is critical; attackers

must take the ball into the

square.)

Coaching Progressions
Players have a time limit.

The attackers rotate clockwise to play against each defender in
sequence.
Players compete for greatest number of successes.

112

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

ATTACKING THE CORNERS

Figure 7.20

Equipment
1 ball for 2 players;

4 flags or cones.

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 attacker, 1 defender), each pair
in a 10

X 10 yard square marked by flags or cones (Figure 7.20).

Instructions

The attacker must control the ball and take it to any of the 3 corners.
The attacker scores 1 point for reaching the corners to the left and
right of the defender and 10 points for reaching the corner behind
the defender.

The defender tackles and tries to move the ball out of the square.
Coaching Progressions
The attacker attempts to beat the defender by getting to any corner.

The attacker must try, and keep on trying, to score 10 points.
Players have a time limit.

THE DRIBBLING PEN
Equipment
1 ball for 2 players;

4 flags and 4 cones.

Coaching Dribbling

113

Figure 7.21

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 attacker, 1 defender), each pair
in a 10

X 10 yard square marked by flags.

Cones are set at 1-yard minigoals along 1 side of the square (Figure
7.21).

Instructions

Play begins with the attacker outside the square and the defender
inside. The attacker tries to score by dribbling the ball through either

of the minigoals.

The defender defends both goals and wins by tackling or playing
the ball off the grid. The defender cannot tackle until the attacker
enters the square.

The game continues until the attacker scores or loses possession.
Coaching Progressions
1 goal is assigned more points.

The attacker has 2 or 3 attempts before the players change roles.

The players compete for the highest score or the fastest goal.
The attacker is eliminated after 30 seconds.

CHALLENGE
Equipment
4 balls for 8 players; 8 to 10 flags or cones.

114

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Figure 7.22

Organization

Players are in groups of 8 (1 goalkeeper, 3 defenders, 4 attackers)
in 10

X 10 yard squares marked by flags or cones and arranged as

shown in Figure 7.22.
One defender stands at the back of each square with the goalkeeper
on his or her goal line.
Instructions

Attackers dribble toward each defender in turn and try to maneuver
the baU past the defender into the next square and, if successful,
into the penalty area for a shot at the goal.

Defenders must wait

until the attacker enters their square before they can move from the
line, and they must offer only the degree of resistance specified by

the coach.

Coaching Progressions

On the first attempt, the attacker is allowed to beat each defender
in turn and shoot at the goal when he or she enters the penalty area.

On the second attempt, the defenders are given a percentage resistance figure (e.g., first defender 10%; second defender 20%; and
the third defender 30%). The aim is to provide the attacker token
resistance to permit a second shot at the goal.

Coaching Dribbling

115

As the attackers improve, the degree of difficulty is increased. This
can be done in one of two ways. Either the coach specifies the
increased percentage resistance figure for each defender, or the
attacker calls out this figure, thus specifying his or her level of
opposition.

The ultimate challenge for the attacker is to defeat the defenders
and score even when all defenders give 100% resistance.
Note: Percentage resistance by defenders is a subjective measure.
The defenders must try to make a fair judgment, as they will soon

be attackers themselves!

1

VS. 1

Figure 7.23

This is the final and most exacting of all dribbling practices. It is also physically demanding and requires you to act as a referee, as it can become

very competitive.

Equipment

Ample balls; 4 flags; 8 cones.

116

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 attacker,

1

defender) in a

30 X 10 yard minifield divided into 3 squares and marked by cones.

4-yard wide goals are marked by flags (Figure 7.23).
Instructions

Each pair plays for 2 minutes (or less for younger players). Goals
can only be scored when the attacker is in the square nearest the
goal (this encourages dribbling, not shooting).

When the ball goes out of play, the attacker takes possession at the
point where the ball went out. The defender must retreat 4 yards
to allow the attacker to restart play.

There is no goalkeeper; players defend the goal but they must not
use their hands.

Those not playing stand around the playing area at regular intervals
and retrieve the ball to encourage maximum continuous play.
Coaching Progressions

To introduce the games, always pair players according to abUity.
If

you play a tournament, use a round-robin or an all-play-all system

rather than an elimination system, because those who are eliminated

don't get any more practice and they are probably the ones who

need it most. You may need more than 1 field of play.

you do hold a straight elimination tournament, arrange a firsttime losers competition on an adjacent area.
If

If

you hold an elimination competition, use a handicapping system

to encourage the less able players; do this by handicapping the better

players (e.g.. Player X starts minus 1 goal).

Note: This activity is a very useful way of handling the "ball hog"
(chapter 20).

CHAPTER 8

Coaching Tackling
and Defensive Skills
All players must develop good defensive skills, which includes more than

being able to tackle correctly. Good defenders are able to outthink their
opponents and can often win the ball or force an error without coming
into contact with the attacker. Defenders must be able to anticipate plays,
play aggressively, and position themselves correctly. When these mental
skills are combined with courage and determination, we have a real
defender. Chapter 8 begins with mental strategies for advanced players
who already know how to tackle. If you coach beginners, you may want
to start at p. 137, which deals with coaching the basic tackles.
Every defender must be able to recognize whether he or she is the first
or the second defender. The first defender is the player who is nearest
the opponent with the ball and whose main duty is to stop the attacker
from advancing unchecked, playing the ball forward, and shooting a goal.
The second defender must support the first defender but must also think

about the developing tactical situation.
When defenders are confused about which roles they should be playing,
they are most vulnerable. Players cannot be taught too soon that the
nearest player goes to meet the ball. That is, the nearest defender is always
the first defender.

117

1

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

118

The First Defender
The first defender must know how to
1.

close down on an attacker and jockey,

win the ball by good positioning and interception,
stop the attacker from turning with the ball,
4. force an attacker one way, and
2.

3.

5.

recover when beaten.

How to Close Down on an Attacker
The first defender must always go forward toward the attacker with the
ball. If the attacker is close,

the first defender has only a short distance

to cover. However, when the attacker is some yards away, the defender

must move quickly yet cautiously; to rush at an attacker who is in full
possession of the ball is asking for trouble! You can coach players to close
down on attackers in four stages:

Approach
The defender runs quickly and with a normal running action while the
ball is traveling toward the attacker but is not yet under his or her control

(Figure 8.1).

Figure 8.
Approach.

Split Step

To halt the running action, the defender executes a split step by stopping sharply with one foot forward and one backward, the body in a

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

119

crouched position to aid balance. This should be done about 3 yards from
the attacker if he or she has full control over the ball (Figure 8.2).

Figure 8.2
Split step.

Close In

The defender now^ closes in on the attacker cautiously and in a threatening
manner, edging forward step by step, front leg leading. The intention
is to force the attacker to look down at the ball to see where it is. At the
moment the attacker's eyes go down, he or she is no longer a direct threat
(Figure 8.3).

Figure 8.3
Close in.

Jockey
Having contained the attacker and prevented a penetrating move, the
defender should jockey and try to win the ball or force the attacker away
from the danger zone (Figure 8.4).

120

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 8.4
Jockey.

How to Jockey.

Jockeying, the skill of keeping between the attacker
and his or her intended target (usually the goal) requires the defender
to slow down or delay the attacker by backing off slowly while at the same
time trying to force an error or make a successful tackle. The jockeying
stance is similar to that of a boxer; the body is held sideways, the feet
are apart, and the weight is on the toes to allow quick movement in any
direction. The eyes watch the ball and the midline of the attacker's body,
not the head or shoulders of the attacker. In this way, sudden upper body
movements do not throw the defender off balance.
The key to good jockeying is footwork. The defender's feet move like the
boxer's (Figure 8.5) but must never be caught square to the line of attack
(Figure 8.6).

• ••

Figure 8.5

The proper foot position for jociceying.

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

121

• ••

Figure 8.6

The improper foot position for jockeying.

Drills for Intermediates

The following drills are appropriate to use when coaching intermediate
defensive skills.

LONDON BRIDGE (P. 101)

1

VS. 1

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players; 4 flags or cones.

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability (1 attacker, 1 defender), each pair
in a 10 X 15 yard coaching grid marked by flags or cones (Figure 8.7).

122

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

•a

Figure 8.7

Instructions

The defender (Player A) plays ball to the attacker (Player B), then
tries to prevent Player B getting past but without executing a tackle
(i.e.,

jockey only).

Coaching Points
The defender should keep his or her body crouched, in a sideways
position, with one foot forward and weight on the toes.

The defender should look at the midline of the attacker's body.
The defender should threaten to tackle and strike with the leading
foot and steal the ball.
The defender should back off slowly.
Coaching Progressions
Players observe normal rules for tackling.
Introduce a second attacker as shown in Figure 8.8. Player A now
plays the ball to either Player B or Player C and has to stop either
of them from getting through (Players B and C may interpass).

Drills for Advanced Players

The following drills are appropriate to use when coaching advanced defensive skills.

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

Figure 8.8

1

VS. 1

Figure 8.9

123

124

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Equipment
1 ball for each 4 players;

4 flags; 8 cones.

Organization

Players are in groups of 4, each group on a 30 x 10 yard minifield
divided into 3 squares and marked by cones. Goals are marked by
flags (Figure 8.9).

Instructions

Player Z acts as goalkeeper.
Player A plays the ball to Player B, who controls the ball, turns, and
tries to get past Players Y and Z to make a goal.

Player Y cannot start play until Player A actually passes the ball to
Player B.

Coaching Points
The coach can emphasize any of the coaching points covered in this
chapter as they arise. In particular the coach should encourage inventiveness and positive, aggressive play.

Coaching Progressions
Player A helps Player B maneuver around Players Y and Z.
Introduce the offside rule to help Player Y.

Winning the Bali by Good Positioning
Clearly, interception and good positioning go hand in hand; good posi-

tioning helps the defender to win the ball by interception. But I feel these

elements have an important difference in the mind of the player. The decision to intercept comes at the moment the ball is actually played, while
the thought processes that control good positioning occur over a period
of time and in relation to the tactical movements of other players. This
difference is worth developing with your advanced players, and you can
start with the following two examples (Figure 8.10

and Figure 8.11).

Figure 8.10 shows the perfect example of how the defender (Player A)
ensures winning the ball by good positioning. If the attacker (Player B)
plays the ball over or past Player A, Player C loses in the race to the ball.
If the ball is

played to Player C's feet. Player A simply stops him or her

from turning with the ball and in this way gains more time. This is good
defending.
In Figure 8.11, the ball is played to the attacker (Player C) from midfield.
The defender (Player A) is now in a position to win the ball by interception as a result of good positioning.

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

Figure 8.10

An example of good positioning by a defender.

Figure 8.11

The defender positioned to intercept the ball.

125

126

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Winning the Ball by Interception
Good positioning results from thought processes that occur over a period
of time, while good interception requires a split-second decision and reaction. To coach interception you must coach the mind of the defender; the

following practice is unique in its effectiveness for this purpose. You can
use it with players of all ages and abilities and can very easily develop it
into dribbling, screening,

and tackling drills (Figure 8.12).

Figure 8. 12

INTERCEPTING THE PASS

Equipment
1 ball for each

2 or more players; 4 flags or cones.

Organization

Players are in 2 groups of equal ability, each group in a corner of
a 10 X 10 yard square marked by flags or cones (Figure 8.12).

Instructions

The coach serves the ball toward the players. Players A and B must
both try to win the ball and play it back to the coach. After the play,
the next players in line take a turn.

Coaching Points

The moment the ball is served, players must make instant judgments
about whether or not they can get to the ball first. Some decisions
are easy, as when the ball is directed in favor of a player. But sometimes players have an equal chance. In this situation, players should

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

127

always go for the ball and hope they are quicker off the mark or
a faster runner.

Players who quit in 50/50 situations will never win the ball.

Coaching Progressions
The coach serves several passes in such a way that it is absolutely
clear which player will get the ball. This develops the confidence
of the players to move forward and make successful, if easy, interceptions.

As the players gain confidence, the coach serves the ball in favor
of one player as a 60/40 or 50/50 ball. Players have to develop much
finer judgment,

make their decisions early, and be determined.

The player who wins the ball becomes the attacker and has to turn
with the ball and dribble it across the target line.
The player who does not win the ball becomes the defender and
has 3 objectives: Stop the attacker from turning with the ball; jockey
the attacker and force him or her sideways; and win possession of
the ball and return it to the coach.

INTERCEPTING THE PASS (ADVANCED)
Equipment
1 ball for each 3 players.

Organization

Players are in a group of 3 (1 attacker, 1 defender, 1 server). Players
are positioned as shown in Figures 8.10 and 8.11.
Instructions

The server plays a variety of balls to the attacker. The server may
dribble the ball in different directions before making the pass— this
changes the picture for the defender.

The attacker tries to gain possession and beat the defender. The
attacker should keep moving to fool the defender.
While the server has the ball, the defender positions himself or herself to see the attacker and the server. The defender intercepts the
pass if it is safe to do so. If not, the defender defends as appropriate.
Coaching Points
Remind defender that good positioning is a continuous process of
decision making.

The defender should always be in a position to see the ball and the
attacker. The defender should watch the tactical move develop without losing sight of the particular attacker that he or she is covering.

128

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The defender should allow himself or herself a handicap start. If
the ball is played toward the defender's goal, the defender should
be able to win the race to the ball.

The defender should always position on the goal side of the attacker (or nearly always— there are some exceptions).
Coaching Progressions
The practice develops into a small-team game or a functional practice.

Stopping the Attacker From Turning Witti ttie Ball
Excellent defensive play will stop the attacker with the ball from turning

and attacking the defender's goal. Such defensive play counters three
potential dangers: the shot at goal, the pass forward, and the attacking
dribble.

Stopping the turn is a hallmark of good defense by individuals and by
It is an advanced skill, however, because it
requires confidence plus the self-control not to tackle from behind and
risk giving away a free kick or, worse, a penalty kick (Figure 8.13).
the defense as a whole.

Figure 8. 13
Stopping the turn.

STOPPING THE TURN
Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

129

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability,

moving in free space.

Instructions

The attacker tries to turn with the ball and beat the defender.
The defender tries to stop the turn.
Coaching Points
The defender should stay about 3 feet behind the attacker.

The defender should stay on his or her toes and be patient.
The defender should not tackle through the legs— this may be a foul.

The defender should tackle when the attacker tries to turn.
Coaching Progressions
Play moves to situation shown in Figure 8.14.

See chapter 16 for more advanced drills.

Figure 8.14

Forcing an Attacker One Way
In addition to slowing an attacker by jockeying and backing off, a good
defender can often force the attacker one way. That is, by positioning
to one side of the attacker, the defender can force the attacker away from

the danger zone, toward other, supporting defenders, or onto the stronger
tackling side of the defender.

Perhaps the best example of forcing an attacker to move in the least
dangerous direction occurs when the fullback directs or "invites" the
winger to play down the sideline, thus stopping the winger from attacking directly toward goal.

130

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

FORCING AN ATTACKER
Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in evenly matched pairs, facing each other 5 yards apart

on any straight line on the soccer field.
Instructions

The attacker has the ball and tries to beat the defender by getting
the ball onto the line behind the defender.

The defender tries to force the attacker away from the line in the
direction the defender wants the attacker to go.
Coaching Points
The defender should use a technique similar to jockeying but with
a much more definite body position that shows the attacker the open
side.

Coaching Progressions
The defender forces the attacker in the direction the defender selects.

The defender identifies the weaker kicking foot of the attacker and
forces the attacker that way.

Players use this technique in a 1 vs. 1 drill (p. 121).

Recovering From Being Beaten
What do 1 do if I'm beaten? This is not the kind of question a player is
likely to ask a coach because the answer might be a rebuke: "Don't think

about being beaten— think positive!" However, players do get beaten,
and they must know what to do when it happens. Players should be
taught the following.
Give Immediate Chase

Inexperienced or poor players often throw their heads up or cry out
in anguish if they make a mistake; this wastes valuable time. The
first thought in the player's

mind must be to get back into the game.

Use the Recovery Line
Unless a player is the last defender, he or she seldom chases directly
after the player who has the ball, because the cover defender will
be chasing that player.

When beaten, defenders should run hard along their recovery line
(Figure 8.15).

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

131

Get Goalside of the Ball

The player must continue to run hard along the recovery line until
he or she is closer to the goal than the ball is.
Stop and Cover

Having reached this point, the player reassesses the situation and
normally becomes the second defender (Figure 8.16).

Recovery Lines
All defenders

have recovery lines. These are pathways along which

players run if they are beaten. Players who are beaten on the sides of
the field run back toward the nearest goalpost. Players beaten in the center
of the field run back toward the penalty spot or the middle of the goal.

Figure 8.15
Recovery lines for a beaten defender.

The four stages of recovery are shown in Figure 8.16. In this diagram,
the first defender (Player A) has been beaten by the attacker (Player C).
The second defender (Player B) covers to prevent Player C from having
a clear run at goal. Player A now goes through the recovery drill by turning quickly and sprinting back along the recovery line until goalside of

132

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

the ball. Once Player A has recovered goalside of the ball, he or she acts
as the second defender.

Figure 8.16
Four stages of recovery.

The Second Defender
The second defender must support the first defender who has gone to
meet the attacker with the ball. The manner in which the second defender
moves to give this support is vital to good defensive play; a player who
moves too soon or too late can be easily bypassed. So how should the
second defender cover and support, and what other tactics can he or she
employ to foil an attack? This section deals with covering and supporting the first defender and setting the offside trap.

How to Cover and Support
The basic covering position for the second defender (Player B in Figure
8.17) is about 6 to 10 yards from the first defender (Player A), at an angle

of 45° and on the most dangerous side (usually the goal side). Exact mea-

sures such as 6 to 10 yards or 45° can never be absolute, but they do pro-

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

133

vide a useful starting guide for the following reasons. A defender who
stands square does not provide support because the attacker can beat both

defenders in one move (Figure 8.18).

Figure 8.17
Basic covering position for ttie second defender.

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

134

If the second defender stands

Soccer

more than 8 to 10 yards behind the first

defender, then the second defender is not providing sufficient cover. The
attacker has ample room in which to play (Figure 8.19).

Figure 8.19

The second defender should not stand more than 8 or 10 yards behind the
first defender.

How To Set the Offside Trap
Knov^ing how and when to catch opponents offside is an ability all players
must acquire. Providing it is not overused (becoming a dangerous tactic
for the defense to use and simultaneously destroying the character of a
game), it is a legitimate and important part of defensive play. To use this
technique your players must develop three fundamental skills.
1.

A knowledge of the rules governing offside play.

2.

The ability to simultaneously observe the player with the ball and
the tactical situation that is developing. Such vision often begins

3.

The recognition by all defenders that only the player at the very
back of the defense— usually called the rearmost defender— should

with the simple instruction to players to keep their heads up.

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

135

execute or spring the offside trap. The rearmost defender is the key
player in executing the move personally and in controlling the
actions of other defenders.

The following diagrams show how the offside trap can be used to stop
an attack.

Stage 1— Identifying the Rearmost and Key Defender
In Figure 8.20, the defenders (Players X and Y) are outnumbered by 4
attackers, of

whom Player B has the ball.

Figure 8.20
Identifying the rearmost and l<ey defender.

Player Y goes forward to contain Player B. The nearest defender going
to meet the ball is good play.

Player X is now the rearmost and therefore the key defender. Player
X must first give cover to Player Y. (If Player B dribbles past Player Y,
then Player X is the only defender who can prevent a direct attack on
goal). However, while giving support. Player X must also recognize the
possibility of playing the offside trap.

Stage 2— Prepare But Don't Act
While supporting Player Y, Player X must also watch the movements of
all the attackers, including Player A who may be hoping to make a blindside or backdoor run. This is the essential skill of the good defender— the
art of being able to watch the ball and the developing situation at the same

time (Figure 8.21).

136

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

jDC

B

Figure 8.21

A defender must be able to watch the ball and the field at the same time.

Stage 3— Spring the Trap

The defenders hope that the attackers, in their haste to take advantage
of the situation and before Player B releases the pass, will continue running forward and come square into line with Player X or even run goalside of Player X. (In either case they are offside, because to be in line is
sufficient.) In this situation. Player

X simply stands still and lets the

attackers put themselves offside (Figure 8.22).

Figure 8.22
Spring the trap.

Against more experienced attackers. Player X can actually produce the
offside situation by moving quickly upfield just before Player B releases

the pass forward. This is a critical moment, and the decision and timing

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

137

must be exact; if Player X makes the move too late, not only are the
attackers not offside but they are in an even better position. Judging when
to move requires practice in attack versus defense. The defender must
watch both the player with the ball and the movements of the other
attackers. One useful signal of when to move comes when Player B, with
the ball, looks down at the ball to kick it. At this moment. Player X can

often outwit the attackers.

Only the rearmost defender can set the offside trap. Because the second
defender will often also be the rearmost defender, he or she must always
be alert to the possibility of catching the attackers in an offside position.
To set an effective offside trap, the rearmost defender must
•

make sure he or she is the rearmost defender by looking both ways
across the field,

•

identify the attacker who is most easily caught,

•

split his or her attention between this attacker and the attacker who
has the ball and who will usually be covered by the first defender, and
be patient, watching and waiting until he or she anticipates that the

•

attacker with the ball will actually make a pass forward.

Remember, the attacker must pass because dribbling does not breach
the offside rules. Just before the pass is made, the defender should move

quickly upfield leaving the chosen attacker as the only player between
the ball and the goalkeeper at the moment the ball is played. This is the
critical

move.

The Basic Tackles
This section examines the techniques of the three basic tackles in soccer:
the block tackle, the side tackle, and the sliding tackle.
I always coach the block tackle first because it introduces the idea of
hard but safe body contact, which can help some beginners overcome
a natural aversion to hard physical contact. Be careful when coaching this
tackle; a player who becomes overcompetitive can cause an accident. For
this reason keep strict discipline and match your players for weight as

well as height and ability whenever possible.

The Block Tackle
This tackle is very effective when the attacker comes directly toward the
defender, especially when space is limited as in a crowded penalty area.
This tackle is a powerful movement, which if done well not orJy stops the
attacker but gives the defender a reasonable chance of winning possession.
To generate sufficient force to overcome the momentum of the attacker.

138

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

the defender's body has to be crouched to lower the center of gravity,
the instep of the striking foot has to move as if to go "through" the ball
rather than to stop at it, and the leading shoulder has to move powerfully

forward as the foot strikes the ball.

The player whose body position is similar to that shown in Figure 8.23
will never win a tackle!

Figure 8.23
Poor body position for a tacl<le.

Drills for Beginners

BLOCK TACKLE DRILL
Because the block tackle can be dangerous if taught badly, I use a series
of progressions into the full action. They work and are enjoyable,
I

recommend them to you.

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal size, weight, and ability.
Instructions

Follow the sequence under Coaching Progressions.

and

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

139

Coaching Points
Players should keep their bodies crouched with a low center of
gravity.

Players should use their insteps and keep their knees over the ball.
Players should put their weight into the tackle, shoulder forward.
Players should strike through the ball, not at it.

Coaching Progressions
Players place their hands on each other's shoulders, keeping their

arms straight (Figure 8.24a).
Both players tackle gently so that their feet come into simultaneous
contact with the ball (Figure 8.24b).
Players drop their arms. This is the same tackle but the shoulder
now comes into play. Players increase force and realism, but the
ball should not move (Figure 8.24c).

(Cont.)

Figure 8.24

140

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 8.24 (Continued)

Players take one short step backward. On command, they step in

with the left foot and tackle with the right. Both players should tackle
simultaneously; this is most important.
Players move to active but not 100% effort. They progress to live

competition but limit the number of practices to 5 (Figure 8.24d).

Drills for Intermediates

CORNER AND LINE ATTACK
Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players;

4 flags or cones.

Organization

Players are in pairs (1 attacker, 1 defender), each pair in a 10 x 10

yard square marked by flags or cones (Figure 8.25a).
Instructions

The attacker (Player A) has the ball and tries to attack the defender's
(Player B's) corner.

Player B tries to win the ball. Player B must stay on his or her feet,

using no sliding tackles.

Coaching Points

Same as for jockeying and block tackles.

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

141

Coaching Progressions
Player A tries to attack Player B's line (Figure 8.25b), which makes

defending harder because of the wider target line.

Corner attack

Line attack

Figure 8.25

Drills for Advanced Players

For advanced players I recommend a tackling pen system, in which two
players act as defenders and the remaining players bring the ball toward

them one at a time.

Figure 8.26

142

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

TACKLING PEN
Equipment
1 ball for each attacking player; 4 cones; 4 flags.

Organization

Players are in a group of unlimited number (2 defenders, the rest
attackers) in a 30 x 20 yard minifield marked by cones, with 5-yard
wide goals marked by flags (Figure 8.26).
Instructions

Defenders remain between their goals and do not move more than
2 yards from this area. Defenders try to stop the attackers.
Attackers use continuous, single file approach, giving the defenders
time to recover position between tackles. Attackers beat the defenders

by dribbling through the goals.
Coaching Points

Same as for Block Tackle Drill.
Coaching Progressions
Players compete to see how few attackers beat the defenders.

The defenders change at regular intervals, because this is a very
demanding drill.

The Side Block Tackle

,

Using the front block tackle is one way of dealing with an attacker who
brings the ball directly toward a defender. To stop the player who is

moving past the defender diagonally or who is already past, there are
two main techniques— the sliding tackle and the side block tackle. I teach
the side block tackle first because it allows the defender to stay on his
or her feet and also provides a very useful introduction to the sliding
tackle.

The tackle is best considered in four stages. First, the defender runs
hard to draw alongside the attacker (Figure 8.27a). Next, the defender
turns inward at the attacker using the foot nearest the attacker (Figure
8.27b). The defender then crouches down and hooks the tackling foot
around the ball using the side of the instep (Figure 8.27c) and completes
the turn while hooking the ball until it breaks clear from the attacker's
foot (Figure 8.27d). Ideally the defender gains possession of the ball; in
reality the defender often stops the attacker while the ball bounces free.
At the beginning stage, it's most important that the defender is still standing upright after the tackle and at least has a chance to continue to pressure the attacker.

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

143

Figure 8.27
The side block tackling sequence.

Drills for Intermediates

SIDE BLOCK TACKLE

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs of equal ability, size, and weight (1 attacker, 1
defender).

144

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

n
V
II
•o
•o
•o
Figure 8.28

Both players stand facing the same direction along the sideline
(Figure 8.28).
Instructions

The attacker (Player A) has the ball and dribbles it forward at a steady
pace and in a straight line.

The defender (Player B) executes the tackle.
Coaching Points
The defender should run hard to get level, turn on the nearside foot,
and crouch down as he or she turns to get a lower center of gravity.

The defender should hook the tackling foot around the ball and
complete the turn, hooking the ball hard until it breaks clear.
Coaching Progressions

The attacker increases the pace of the dribble.
The defender tries to actually win possession of the ball rather than
just force it away.

Drills for Advanced Players

Use the previous drill for intermediates but require the defender, after
he or she completes the first tackle, to immediately chase and tackle a
second attacker, who waits for the first challenge to finish and then moves
off in another direction.

Use the tackling pen (p. 141).

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

145

The Sliding Tackle

A good defender will stay on his or her feet as long as possible and only
use the sliding tackl e as a last resort, because if it fails, that defender is
out of the game. Nevertheless, on many occasions the sliding tackle is
the only way to stop an attacker who has broken through; it is an essential skill for every player. Moreover, because this tackle is a spectacular

and exciting achievement when executed successfully, all players enjoy
practicing it, providing the ground is soft and the players wear protective clothing. Never have your players practice on hard, dry ground without protection; you will do more harm than good.
The tackle contains three stages: the chase, the slide, and the sweep.
The tackling player chases the ball until confident that his or her leading
foot wUl overtake the ball (Figure 8.29a).
The near leg (the left leg in the figure) leads, allowing the player to sink
down onto the left leg, which curls beneath the seat. The far leg (the right
leg in the figure) swings around in a wide sweep, with the foot hooked,
toward the ball (Figure 8.29b).

(Cont.)

Figure 8.29

146

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Figure 8.29 (Continued)
Slide tackle sequence.

The tackling leg sweeps through the ball and either traps it with the
hooked foot or, more usually, plays the ball away (Figure 8.29c). As a
fullback 1 used to love the sliding tackle, especially when I came out of
it

with the ball!

Drills for Advanced Players

SLIDING TACKLE DRILL

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players;

defenders wear sweatpants.

Organization
Players are in pairs of equal abUity and speed (1 attacker, 1 defender).

Both players stand facing the same direction along the sideline
(Figure 8.28).
Instructions

The attacker (Player A) has the ball and dribbles it forward at a steady
pace and in a straight line. The defender (Player B) executes the
tackle.

Coaching Points
The defender should not jump in— this is a foul.

Coaching Tackling and Defensive Skills

147

The defender should watch the ball and strike through it.
The defender should always tackle with the outside leg, the one farthest from the attacker at the start of the tackle.

The defender should use the nearside hand to cushion the fall and
make sure he or she can reach the ball before attempting the tackle.
The defender should sprint hard to catch up with the attacker but
should not get too close behind the attacker. The defender will need
room to execute the slide.
Coaching Progressions

The tackling player sits on the ground in the correct position while
the coach explains the position.

Players practice gently lowering down into this sitting position,

learning how to take the weight on the nearside hand.
Players practice moving and tackling a stationary ball, emphasizing

playing through the ball.

The player with the ball dribbles in a straight line at an easy pace
inviting the tackle and keeps going until tackled. The speed increases
as the players progress.

The coach rolls the ball for the 2 players to chase. The tackle must
be made within 20 yards by the designated tackier.

Determination

No chapter on tackling is complete without a word about determination.
Without a wholehearted, fearless commitment to the tackle, a player is
likely to be beaten and is also likely to get hurt. There is no substitute
for a hard but fairly executed tackle, and the key coaching point is always
determination.

(

1

150

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

How Soccer Cleats Should Be Laced
Many young players have large, loosely tied bows that interfere with the
contact on the ball and may come loose during the game. The correct
method of lacing provides a neat, flat kicking surface and is securely tied
off with a flat knot on the outside of the cleat.
To lace cleats correctly, first remove the lace completely. Using one end
of the lace only in a surgeon's stitching action:

Go down into the top right hole and up
out of the bottom left hole (Figure 9.1a).
Continue stitching with the left end of
the lace by going down into the holes on

the right side and up out of the holes on
the left side until fully laced (Figure 9.1b).
Tie off on the outside using a flat knot
(Figures 9.1c and d).

Figure 9.
Proper method of lacing cleats.

The length of the ends can be adjusted very easily and the lace tightened
by pulling with the fingers on the next to the bottom loop and working
upward.

Coaching Kicking

151

How to Make and Use A Kicking Tee
When teaching a novice player how to kick correctly, or teaching an experienced player how to kick with his or her weaker foot or to swerve the
make a tee, take a medium-sized plastic-coated
cup and cut the bottom half away as shown in Figure 9.2. The top half
of the cup is inverted to make the tee upon which the ball is placed.

ball, use a kicking tee. To

Figure 9.2

Making a kicking tee.

Because the ball is now raised off the ground, the player can kick it
correctly with the instep (the laces) without the fear of stubbing his or
her toe. As the player improves, cut the tee down lower and lower untU
it

is

no longer needed.

You can also use the tee when teaching advanced players how to swerve
a ball or how to gain height and distance from a corner kick or goal kick.

The Instep Drive
The instep drive is one of the most powerful kicks in soccer; because it
keeps the ball low, the instep drive is most effective when shooting at
the goal. Using this drive, the player kicks the ball with the instep, which
fits comfortably

and almost vertically into the back of the ball. If this part

of the geometry is correct, the rest of the body position is of secondary
importance; however, several factors can improve the player's chance of

success. For example, the toe must be down; the knee should be placed
over the ball; the body should be compact and over the ball, not open

or leaning back; and the follow-through should be short and straight on

152

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

line. All of these points can be achieved

more easily if the nonkicking

foot is placed alongside the ball, the head is kept down and still, and the

body shape is compact (Figures 9.3a, b, and c).

Figure 9.3

The instep drive.

Drills for Beginners
I

it

always use a kicking tee for beginners. It is a simple coaching aid, but
really does make learning to kick easier and safer.

KICKING TEE DRILL
Equipment
1 ball for each player (ball must be of the correct size and pressure

for the player); ample kicking tees (unless they are made of plastic,

they are easily damaged).

Coaching Kicking

153

Organization

Players are in groups of up to 6 players in a straight line with a mini-

mum of 3 yards between players. The line should be parallel to and
about 10 yards from the target goal.
For larger groups arrange a rotation system.
Instructions

One at a time, when called, players use the instep drive to play the
ball toward the target.

Players must not lift the ball more than 3 to 4 feet off the ground.

Coaching Points
Players should approach the ball in a straight line with the toe down
and with compact body shape.
Players should follow through in a straight line.

Coaching Progressions
Players increase power and distance by moving further away from
the target.

Two Common Faults
Even at this early stage, you must watch for the two most common faults
in beginners— the toe punt and slicing the ball (Figures 9.4a and b). To
correct these faults, review the earlier stages of this drill.

Figure 9.4

The two most common errors in beginners are a) ttie toe punt and b) slicing
across the ball.

154

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Drills for Intermediates
Intermediate players should strike at a moving ball and increasingly generate power, accuracy,

and distance.

MOVING BALL DRILL

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organizations

Players are in pairs 10 to 15 yards apart with a minimum of 10 yards

between pairs.
Instructions

Player plays the ball to his or her partner with the instep drive,

keeping the ball below 3 to 4 feet in height.
Coaching Points
Players should strive for accuracy and technique before power.
Players should strike through the ball, not at it, and should generate

power from the hips.
Coaching Progressions
Players stop the ball and play it forward before kicking.
Players drive the ball directly back to their partners (i.e., first-time
kicking).

Players increase the distance between each other.

Drills for Advanced Players

The best progressions for intermediate and advanced players are the
shooting drills contained in chapter 10 and arranged in a progressive
sequence. One additional and enjoyable drill is a penalty competition in
which the players must use the instep drive. The usual variation is an
elimination competition, but initially you can have a qualifying competition that allows every player to have 3 attempts at instep driving before
being eliminated for missing.

Coaching Kicking

155

The Long, Lofted Kick
This kick requires both height and distance. The player achieves height

by leaning back, keeping behind the ball, and kicking underneath it. The
player achieves distance through a combination of factors, such as a
powerful swinging action with a high follow-through, a long lever (like
a golf club), and an angled approach, approximately 45°, to the intended
line of flight.

In preparing for a long, lofted kick, the player lengthens the final stride
to give a long follow-through. Then, the player hits through the ball with

a straight leg, striking for distance rather than height and aiming for a

high follow-through.
Don't let the apparent ease with which professional players kick the
ball fool you; like professional golfers, they have learned to time this action
and produce what is called a kinetic chain (Figures 9.5a and b).

Figure 9.5

Sequence for the long, lofted kick.

Drills for Beginners

The secret to success with beginners is using a kicking tee and having
the players kick into a net or a baseball cage. By using this method you
can watch each player's technique closely and in complete safety, and

nobody has to chase after the ball.

156

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

LOFTED KICK FROM A TEE
Equipment
1 ball for each player; ample kicking tees; regular goal net or base-

ball cage.

Organization

Players are in a straight line 3 yards apart, not more than 5 yards

from the target or net.
Instructions

One at a time, players kick into the net, aiming for height and
distance.

Coaching Points
Players should lengthen the final stride to give a long followthrough.
Players should keep the toe down and strike through the bottom
of the ball.

Players should approach at an angle of 45°.
Players should keep the nonkicking foot well behind and to the side
of the ball.

Players should aim for a long, high follow-through.

Coaching Progressions
Players progress from using the kicking tee to kicking from the
ground.
Players try with the nonpref erred foot kicking from a tee.

Drills for Intermediates
Intermediate players should first practice long kicking a ball that is gently
rolled toward them, then try long kicking a ball that is rolling away from

them, and finally practice kicking a stationary ball.

DISTANCE DRILL
Equipment
1 ball for each 4 players.

Organization

Players are in groups of 4, standing 20 yards apart in free space.

Coaching Kicking

157

Instructions

Player A rolls the ball to Player B, who plays a long, lofted kick to
Player C.

Player C rolls the ball to Player D, who kicks the ball back to Player

A. The sequence continues with all players taking their turn to kick.

Coaching Points
Players should keep their heads down until after contact.
Players should go for a high follow-through and hit through the ball

with a straight leg.
Players should increasingly aim for distance rather than height (e.g.,
trying to play the ball over the heads of the receiving players).

Drills for Advanced Players

Advanced players should engage in two kinds of drills— kicking a stationary ball in the goal kick, comer kick, or free kick situations, and practic-

ing long kicking while moving.

The Volley
The volley kick has a number of variations which all have two things in
common: The ball is completely airborne, and it is kicked with the instep.
Because the ball is airborne it is light and responsive, making the volley
a powerful kick. The problems of balancing on the nonkicking foot and
making perfect contact with the instep make this a difficult kick. Three
things are essential: keeping the toe down, the head still, and the arms
out for balance (Figure 9.6).

Figure 9.6
Proper body position for the volley.

158

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Drills for Beginners

STATIONARY VOLLEY
Again we start with a stationary, captive ball. (This is an ideal practice
for teaching players to use their weaker foot.)
Equipment
1 ball in a net bag for each player.

Organization

Individual players work in free space.
Instructions

Player rests the ball on the ground (to ensure it is both captive and
still),

raises it gently until it is at knee height, then volleys using

the instep.

Coaching Points
Players should use the instep and keep the toe down.
Players should keep eyes on the ball and head still.
Players should follow through in a straight line.

Coaching Progressions
Players increase the force of the kick until the ball in the bag completes a full circle.

Hold the ball for the player, who stands and volleys, then moves
in and volleys.

Drills for Intermediates

BALANCE DRILL

Now the player has to learn how to balance on one foot while kicking
with the other and how to develop finesse and timing.

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs, 2 to 3 yards apart.

Coaching Kicking

159

Instructions

Player A gently tosses the ball to his or her partner, who volleys
it

back for the server to catch.

Players must be careful and gentle. The volley is a delicate skillblasting off or not controlling strength can be dangerous for the
server.

The server should always use two hands to serve.
Coaching Points
Players should keep the toe down and the head still.
Players should hold arms out for balance.

Players should finesse the ball.
Players should keep the foot, ankle, knee, and leg in a straight line.

Coaching Progressions
Players work to develop the skill in both feet.
Players should progress to volleying on the move: Player A moves

gently backward while Player B follows, serving and catching the
ball volleyed by Player A.

Then Player A moves forward and B moves backward, still serving
and catching the volley.
Players change to a serve over the crossbar, which the receiver
volleys into the goals.

Drills for Advanced Players
Soccer Tennis (p. 196) is one of the best ways to develop advanced volleying skills. Or, pairs of players can use chest control to catch a thrown
ball, let it fall to knee height, and volley it back to the partner (see Ball
Juggling, p. 47).

The Chip
The chip gets its name from the golf shot played with the wedge— it is
a short, high, lofted kick with backspin. The player uses a sharp "stabbing" action, toes underneath the ball, with little or no follow-through.
The ball is lifted almost vertically; when it lands, it remains almost stationary or, if very well played, spins backward (see Figure 9.7).

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

160

Figure 9.7

Sequence for the chip.

Drills for Intermediates

Because the chip is too difficult for beginners we begin with intermediate
drUls.

CHIP DRILL

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs, 5 to 8 yards apart.
Instructions

Ser/er rolls the ball gently to the kicker with no spin. Kicker chips
the ball back to the server.

Coaching Kicking

161

Coaching Points
Players should use a short back lift and a stabbing action, with the
toe going under the ball.
Players should use a short follow-through or none at all.
Players should keep the head down over the ball.

The body should jackknife downward as the kick is executed.
Coaching Progressions
Players change to a stationary ball.
Players should work to chip for greater height (such as over the

partner or an obstacle).
Players should try to get the ball to stop dead on landing or even
to roll or spin backward.

Players can try to chip a ball moving away from them.

Drills for Advanced Players
Set plays provide effective chipping practice, but one of the best general

advanced players is the one attributed to the Dutch player
Johanne Cruyff. He is reputed to have practiced the chip kick over an
empty goal, chipping the ball over the crossbar so that it spun back into
drills for

the goal (Figure 9.8).

• ••• •

Figure 9.8

Stab foot under the ball to get backspin.

162

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

CRUYFF DRILL
Equipment

Ample soccer balls and a regular goal without a net.
Organization

Players face the goal, about 10 yards away.
Instructions

Players chip the ball over the crossbar in such a way that it spins
back into the goal on landing (Figure 9.8).

Coaching Points

Same as for intermediate chipping.
Coaching Progressions
Server rolls the ball to the player who chips.
Players practice using a stationary ball.
Players hold competitions to see who can spin the ball back farthest
or can make the most successful chips in a set number of attempts.

The Swerve or Banana Kick
No kick has had a more dynamic effect on modem soccer than the swerve
or banana kick. It is now a priceless asset for attacking free kicks and is

being used more and more in passing situations. It is an advanced skill,
and even experienced professionals have difficulty controlling the amount
and timing of the swerve. Nevertheless, the kick is impotant and is enjoyable to practice; even beginners can practice this kick if they use the kicking tee.

The laws of physics control the movement of the ball after impact
(Figure 9.9).

%. Direction of flight
Spin

^^

^"^

_^ Spin

Point of impact

Figure 9.9

The banana kick.

Coaching Kicking

163

Drills for Intermediates

BANANA DRILL

Figure 9. 10

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players

and ample kicking tees.

Organization

Partners stand facing each other on a straight line, 15 to 20 yards
apart.

Instructions

Player swerve-kicks the ball so that it moves away from the line but
lands at the partner's feet (Figure 9.10).

Coaching Points
Players should select the direction and then focus on the point of
contact on the ball.

Players should remember to follow through.

164

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Players should kick at the bottom of the ball to get a lofted swerve

and at the midpoint of the ball to keep it low.
Coaching Progressions
Players should start with a kicking tee, then progress to a stationary ball.

Players should work to increase swerve and distance and should

attempt both inswing and outswing kicks.

Drills for Advanced Players

Because the swerve kick is so effective for attacking free kicks, the best
practice situations are set plays just outside the penalty area. Some excellent and safe drills are explained in chapter 16. The following drill is also

good fun for general practice and can motivate players to work on their
own.

CORNER DRILL

rrr^

Figure 9.11

Coaching Kicking

165

Equipment
Regular goals plus ample soccer balls.
Organization

Players line up on the goal line (Figure 9.11).
Instructions

Player swerve-kicks the ball into the goal.

Coaching Points

Same as for intermediate swerve kick.
Coaching Progressions
Players use tees placed at the 6-yard line, the penalty line, and the
corner.

Players use a stationary ball.
Players should kick from both sides to develop using the inside and

outside of the foot.

CHAPTER 10

168

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Research also tells us that shots from a narrow angle are easier to save.
Make sure that your players understand the difference between the
shooting zone and the passing zone, and that they know that attempting a shot from the passing zone is seldom in the best interest of the team
(Figure 10.2).

Coaching Shooting

169

Figure 10.3

Organization

Players are divided into 2 groups of up to 10 players. One group

stands behind and to the side of the goal to retrieve the balls; the
other stands as shown in Figure 10.3.
Instructions

The coach rolls a ball gently forward toward the incoming player,

who shoots at the goal (Figure 10.3).
Initially players

do not have a goalkeeper. When a goalkeeper is

used, players must not shoot from less than 15 yards (to protect the
goalkeeper).

Coaching Points
Players should not rush but should stay calm as they move in.
Players should use the instep drive and toe down. Players should
try to place the ball into the corners of the goal.

Coaching Progressions
The coach serves from the other post to the left foot of the player.

A goalkeeper is used; players try to aim at the corners of the goal.
The coach keeps the serve simple and friendly to build up confidence.

170

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

INSTEP DRIVE 2

Figure 10.4

Equipment

Ample balls; a goal with nets.
Organization

Players are in a group of unlimited number on a standard soccer
field.

Instructions

The coach stands about 25 yards from the goal. The player stands
with his or her back to the goal, facing the coach.

The coach rolls the ball past the player toward the goal. The player
spins, chases the ball, and shoots (Figure 10.4).
Coacliing Points

Players should get the nonkicking foot alongside the ball.

Players should keep a compact body shape, stay down on the shot,

and follow through on the target line.
Coaching Progressions

Coach serves the ball over the head of the player and then requires
the student to shoot with the left foot.

Drills for Intermediates
Intermediates should be given a simple control factor before shooting to
begin to achieve greater realism. Again, these drills are in a progressive

sequence.

Coaching Shooting

171

INSTEP DRIVE 3

Figure 10.5

Equipment

Ample balls; a goal with nets.
Organization

The players are in a group of unlimited number on a standard soccer
field. The coach stands on the penalty line; the players stand outside
the D.
Instructions

The coach lobs an aerial ball to the player who heads it forward,
follows in, and shoots (Figure 10.5).
Coaching Points
The simple act of heading the ball forward gives great realism to
the practice.
Players should not head the ball too gently or too hard— it has to
give them just enough time to release the shot.
Players should head toward their best foot and balance on their feet

before shooting. That is, be light on the toes while moving in and
adjust the feet to the movement of the ball.
Players should pick a spot and aim carefully.

Coaching Progressions
Players release the shot within 3 seconds of the first headed contact.

172

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Players use the nonpref erred foot.

The coach sets the target area (e.g., low right) as the player moves
into the shot.

INSTEP DRIVE 4

Figure 10.6

Equipment

Ample balls; a goal with nets.
Organization

Players are in a group of unlimited number on a standard soccer
field.

The coach stands on the D, back to the goal.

Instructions

Each player, with a ball, dribbles toward the coach in turn, then
passes to him or her. The coach gives a return lead pass to the player
to control and shoot (Figure 10.6).
Coaching Points
The pass to the coach must be firm and accurate; a sloppy pass is
ignored. The player must accelerate when giving the pass, but must
balance before shooting.

Shot must be the instep drive and should be controlled accordingly.

Coaching Shooting

173

Coaching Progressions
The coach plays the ball to both sides.
Players who miss the target must retrieve the ball.

The coach plays the pass with some lift or spin to make the shot
more difficult.
The coach designates the target area (e.g., high left).

INSTEP DRIVE 5

This next drill is fun and can be made into a competition. It also accustoms
the players to dribbling the ball, at speed, immediately prior to a shot.

Figure 10.7

174

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Equipment
1 ball for each

2 players.

Organization

Players are in 2 groups of equal number, with 1 goalkeeper, on a

standard soccer field. Group 1 is in the center circle, each player
holding a ball. Group 2 stands behind the goal. The goalkeeper
stands in front of the goal (Figure 10.7).
Instructions

A player from Group 1 dribbles at speed into the D and releases
a shot at the goal on (or very close to) the penalty line.

The goalkeeper stays on the line until the player enters the D, then
works to defend the goal.
Players from Group 2 retrieve the balls.

Coaching Points
Players must select a target, watch the goalkeeper, and place the

shot accordingly.
Players should not lean back, but should have a compact body

shape, with toe and head down.
Players should strike through the ball, not at it, and follow through

along the target line.

Coaching Progressions
The time for the shot to be released is limited (e.g., shoot within
20 seconds).

Teams compete.

A defending player chases the shooter, who has a start of 8 yards.
Drills

Without Regular Goals

The absence of regular goalposts does not eliminate the opportunity to
organize shooting practices. You can have some excellent drills using
corner flags as goals, especially when you are concentrating on low shots
at goal or when you are teaching your players the art of 1 vs. the goalkeeper (when the attacker has broken through and has only the goalkeeper to beat). This is a drill that every attacker must practice.

INSTEP DRIVE 6

Equipment

Ample balls; 2 flags.

Coaching Shooting

175

Figure 10.8

Organization

Players are in 1 team of 5, with 1 goalkeeper, on a 30 x 10 yard
minifield with practice goals marked by flags as shown in Figure
10.8.

Instructions

Player A plays the ball to Player B, who shoots. If the goalkeeper
saves,

he or she returns the ball to Player A, turns around, and

invites a shot from Players C and
If

D

the ball goes past the goalkeeper, Players C and D retrieve the

ball

and set up their own shot.

Coaching Points
Players should stay cool, select a target, and place the ball past the
goalkeeper.
Players should not lean back but should maintain a compact shape.

Coaching Progressions
The shooting player plays the ball once before shooting and tries
with one touch to set up a perfect feed.

The shooting player takes a first-time shot.
The serving player gives different passes (e.g., from the front, from
behind, and as the players improve, from the side).
The server, after serving, becomes a defender.

DriUs for Advanced Players
the drills that follow are ideal for coaching advanced shooting technique because they can be used to coach the mind of the shooter. This
is both a demanding and a very rewarding challenge.

I feel

176

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

When under pressure from defenders, the shooter is denied the most
essential element— time. Not surprisingly, players under pressure become

anxious and either take too long or shoot hastily. Superior players always

know where the goal is and can see the target while preparing to shoot
or when dribbling past defenders, but young players have to develop
these skills.

The following practices are ideal because they develop the correct
sequence of actions. That sequence includes maneuvering the ball into
a realistic shooting position, glancing up at the target, and releasing the
shot. These processes can be reduced to a familiar sequence— control, look,
shoot. As players improve, they can look and then control and shoot in
the same movement.

The drills are in a progressive sequence.

INSTEP DRIVE 7
Defenders start
here

Attackers
here

start

Figure 10.9

Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in 2 groups of equal number (1 group of attackers and
1 group of defenders), with 1 goalkeeper, on a standard soccer field.

The coach stands on the penalty line opposite the center of the goal.
The players stand in 2 lines as shown in Figure 10.9.

Coaching Shooting

177

Instructions

On command, the first attacker dribbles forward, goes around the
coach,

and shoots for the goal.

The first defender sprints along the goal line and tries to stop any
shot that gets past the goalkeeper. Defenders cannot use their hands.

The goalkeeper must remain on the goal line until the attacker has
passed the coach.
After the play, the next players in line take a turn.

Coaching Points
Attackers should dribble quickly but avoid panic.

When attackers pass the coach, they should glance up and pick a
target.

Attackers should concentrate on the correct instep drive technique,
keep their eyes down, and follow the shot for a possible rebound.

Coaching Progressions
Players attack from the other side of the penalty area to develop leftfoot shots.

INSTEP DRIVE 8

Attackers

Figure 10.10

Equipment

Ample balls.

178

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Organization

Players are in 2 groups of equal number (1 group of attackers and
1 group of defenders) on a standard soccer field.

The coach stands at the corner of the penalty area, facing the goal.
The players stand in 2 lines as shown in Figure 10.10: Attacking
players face the goal, and defending players face the coach.
Instructions

The coach serves the ball toward the area between the penalty spot
and the 18-yard line and shouts "go."
The first attacker chases the ball and tries to score.

The first defender spins around and tries to stop the attacker. After
the play, the next players in line take a turn.

Coaching Points
If the defender is too good or too quick for the attacker, the defender
may be handicapped by 1 or 2 extra yards.

The attacker should control the ball (if necessary), look for the goal,
keep the eyes down, place the shot, and stay cool.
Coaching Progressions

Change to the other side of the penalty area so players have to use
their left foot.

INSTEP DRIVE 9

Attackers

Figure 10.11

Coaching Shooting

179

Equipment
each 2 players.

1 ball for

Organization

Players are in 2 groups of equal number (1 group of attackers and
1 group of defenders) on a standard soccer field. Groups are organized so that players of equal ability compete with each other.

Defenders line up on the goal line outside the goal, and attackers
line up outside the penalty area.

The coach stands on the side of the goal opposite the defenders
(Figure 10.11).
Instructions

As the coach rolls the ball, the first attacker moves into the penalty
area, controls the ball,

and tries to score.

At the moment the coach releases the ball, the defender sprints to
challenge the attacker. (The defender must not be allowed to move
too soon.)

Coaching Points
Attacker should control, look, and shoot.
Coaching Progressions
Initially,

the attacker has a clear advantage, which encourages

shooting. The coach serves firmly and accurately.

As players improve, or with better players, the coach serves more
balls that are bouncing and are more difficult for the attacker to

control.

Two attackers and 2 defenders play at a time.

A goalkeeper is used.
Shooting Games
Players never seem to tire of shooting drills, so this section includes some
additional shooting games for your coaching repertoire. You will need
to use pinnies or regular team shirts to distinguish between the teams.

3 VS. 3 IN THE PENALTY AREA

Equipment

Ample balls; pinnies.

180

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 10.12

Organization

Players are in a group of 7 (3 attackers, 3 defenders, 1 goalkeeper)

on a standard penalty area (Figure 10.12).
Instructions

The coach holds the ball until an attacker moves into an open situation. The coach then serves the ball and the game starts.
Defenders and attackers switch roles at regular intervals.
Coaching Points
Attacker should be positive in attacking the defender and take
shooting opportunities early.
Players should aim for accuracy before power and should stay calm.

Coaching Progression
If attackers are unable to get shots on target, the number of defenders
is reduced.

The player with the ball tries to turn and beat the defenders.

Coaching Shooting

181

4 VS. 4

Figure 10.13

Equipment

Ample balls; portable goals or flags; pinnies.
Organization

Players are in 2 teams of 5 (4 players and 1 goalkeeper each), with
2 servers, on a 40 x 25 yard minifield (Figure 10.13). Teams are

organized so that players of equal ability compete with each other.
instructions

The servers, with a good supply of balls, alternately deliver balls
using a variety of serves.

Goals may only be scored in the attacking half.
Coaching Points
All players should try to score when in the attacking half. Players

should try not to shoot from the passing zone. When shooting,
players should stay cool and take careful aim, using low shots if
possible.

182

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Coaching Progressions
Progress to one-on-one marking (e.g., only Player X can tackle
Player B).

CONDITIONED GAME FOR THE WHOLE TEAM

Coaching Shooting

183

The remaining defender (Player W) must stay in the goal area with
the goalkeeper until the ball enters the penalty area. Defender

W

may then play as he or she feels is appropriate in defending against
the two strikers.
Instructions

The server starts the game by passing to one of the attackers.
Players A, B, C, and D combine to get the ball into the penalty area

(which they cannot enter).
Players X, Y, and Z defend as best they can outside the penalty area

(which they cannot enter).
Player

W stays in the goal area until the ball enters the penalty area;
W free.

then Player

is

The strikers remain in the penalty area. When the ball arrives, they
try to score or pass to colleagues who must shoot the first time.
Coaching Points

The players should think for themselves— don't overcoach.
Coaching Progressions

The players change positions to sustain interest.

CHAPTER 11

186

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Equipment
1 volley ball or soft soccer ball for each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs (1 header, 1 server) 3 yards apart.
Instructions

The header kneels, trunk upright and arms bent.
The server gently lobs the ball using both hands, so it lands 2 feet
in front of the header.

The header must dive gently forward putting weight on his or her
hands, with eyes open, and head the ball with the flat part of the
forehead directly back to the hands of the server (Figure 11.1a, b,
and c).

(Cont.)

Figure 11.1

Coaching Heading

187

Figure 11.1 (Continued)

Coaching Points
Header should keep his or her eyes open and head back, so the ball
is struck with the flat part of the forehead.

The header should dive at the ball and remember the ball goes where
the eyes direct it.

Because the server stands above the player, the forehead is correctly
aligned; the dive of the player ensures that the head strikes the ball.
When the ball is headed correctly it goes straight back to the hands
of the server.

A ball that is headed too soon rises up in an arc. A ball headed with
the eyes down simply hits the ground. Therefore, both the player
and the coach get instant feedback about how well the ball was

headed.

As the player gains confidence, the dive will become more adventurous; the server can develop this by serving to the side or conducting the practice in front of goal and developing the full diving header.

THE STANDING TECHNIQUE
This is the more common starting drill.

Equipment
1 volley ball or soft soccer ball for each 2 players.

188

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Organization

Players are in pairs (1 header, 1 server) 3 yards apart.
Instructions

The server gently lobs the ball using both hands.
The header, standing, heads the ball on a flat trajectory back to the
server (Figure 11.2).

Figure 11.2

Coaching Points
The header should stand with 1 foot forward, arms out to the sides.

The header should keep the eyes open, watching the ball as it comes
toward the forehead.

The header should strike the ball with the forehead, keeping the
neck muscles firm and using the upper body to add power.
Coaching Progressions

The header heads the ball toward the server's feet.
While the ball is in the air, the server names a target (e.g., high,
low, left, right).

The server places the ball above head height and the header has
to jump to head it back.
The header increases the power of the head.

Coaching Heading

189

Attacking Heading
Headers attacking the goal usually require the ball to be directed downward and away from the goalkeeper. Thus, the player has two problems
of direction; a good way to coach both is to use a triangular system of
serving and heading (Figure 11.3).

Drills for Beginners

HEADING IN 33

Figure 11.3

Equipment
1 volleyball or soft soccer ball for each 3 players.

Organization

Players are in groups of 3 in a triangle, about 4 yards apart.
Instructions

Player A throws to Player B, who heads to Player C. Player C throws
to Player A, who heads to Player B. The sequence continues with

each player heading in turn. (This is the throw-head-catch sequence,
which is used again later.)

190

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Coaching Points

The server should serve in front of the header, who heads down.
Headers should strike the ball rather than letting it hit them.

Headers should place their feet apart to form a good base, let their
eyes direct the ball to the target, keep their neck and body muscles
firm, and use their arms to increase power.
Coaching Progressions
Players move about the field, slowly at first, continuing the sequence. This sequence develops into the throw-head-catch stance.

Throw-Head-Catch

Equipment
1 regular soccer ball per 6 players.

Organization

Players are in 2 teams of 3 on a 20 x 30 yard minifield with small
goals.

Instructions

The team in possession can only score by heading a goal. They lose
possession if the ball touches the ground, they miss the goal, or the
opposition intercepts the ball.
•

Drills for Intermediates
This next activity is one of my favorite drills— players of all abilities find
it

very enjoyable (Figure 11.4).

2 VS. 2

Equipment
1 ball for each 4 players;

4 flags or cones.

Organization

Players are in 2 teams of 2, in an area 10 yards square with 8-foot

wide goals.

Coaching Heading

191

Figure 11.4

Instructions

Player A serves to Player B, who tries to head past Players Y and

Z to score.
Players Y and Z act as goalkeepers. When they save or catch the
ball,

they become attackers.

The first team to score 10 goals wins.
Coaching Points

The serve must always be in front of the header.
The header should use the forehead, strike the ball hard, tense the
neck and shoulder muscles, and direct the ball past the goalkeepers
by looking at the ball's target.
Coaching Progressions
The header progresses to a diving header (which is made possible

by a careful serve).

The header moves in and jumps up to head the ball at goal, as an
incoming forward would in a game.

Drills for Advanced Players

Advanced players must have a proper goal to aim toward, must play with
a goalkeeper, and must learn to contend with opposition and a ball played

192

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

at varying heights and distances.

Soccer

Such drills are best built up in stages

(chapter 17). A typical example is as follows.

HEADING AT GOAL

Figure 11.5

Equipment

Ample soccer balls of regular size and pressure.
Organization

Players are in groups of 5 (1 server, 1 goalkeeper, 3 headers) on a

standard soccer field.
Instructions

The players form a line at the penalty spot. The server starts with
gentle, helpful serves. Each header takes a turn, aiming for the
corner of the goal (Figure 11.5).

Coaching Points
The header should start 5 yards from the point at which contact will
be made.

The header should move in and jump or dive as appropriate.
The header should aim to generate power with direction.
Coaching Progression
Headers must dive at the ball.

The ball is served from the side or from a greater distance.
The ball is volleyed. Or, with good players, wingers dribble the ball
and center or cross it (Figure 11.6).
Defenders try to stop goals.

Coaching Heading

I

Centers

••••••

••o

193

1

o"

• • • • •

Centers

Attacker heads at goal

Dribbles forward

Dribbles forward

Winger

Winger

Figure 11.6

Defensive Heading
By the time you coach defensive heading, your players will have reached
the intermediate stage and will know the basic techniques. What they
now must develop are power and the courage to meet the ball regardless
of the challenge from the attacker. Indeed, the courage to attack the ball
is a characteristic of both attacking and defensive heading, and it cannot
be emphasized too soon.
A good play by a defensive header has three qualities. The first is height;
height gains time and safety and allows the defense to regroup. The
second quality is distance; this really does clear the ball away from goal.
The third quality is width; the ball must be directed out toward the wings
and thus away from the shooting zone so it does not fall at the feet of
an attacker.

Drills for Intermediates
Drills for intermediates are best taught without opposition.

194

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

HEADING IN 3S

Equipment
1 ball for each 3 players.

Organization

Players are in groups of 3, standing in a line with 5 yards between

each player.
Instructions

Player A throws to Player B, who heads the ball over Player A to

Player C (Figure 11.7).

Figure 11.7

Coaching Points
The header should stand with feet apart and use the ground for
leverage.

The header should place the head at the bottom half of the ball to
gain height and use the arms to pull the chest forward to gain power.

The header should keep the neck and body muscles firm and be
aggressive.

Coaching Progressions
Players increase the distance between themselves.

The header increases the height of the clearance.

Coaching Heading

195

The header runs in, jumps, and heads.
The receiver becomes a moving target.
The server, having served, becomes an opponent.

Drills for Advanced Players

Advanced drills for heading must contain realistic ingredients— such as
opposition and variety of service— that develop commitment and the
courage to move in and attack the ball regardless of the challenging
players.

These elements are best introduced in stages.

HEADED CLEARANCES

Figure 11.8

Equipment
1 ball for each 4 players.

196

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Organization

Players are in groups of 4 (2 headers, 2 servers) on 1/2 of a standard
soccer field (Figure 11.8).
Instructions

The first server serves a high ball to a nominated header.
The header heads the ball to the second server, who stands outside
the penalty area and at least 8 yards away. Having caught the ball,
this player returns a throw to the second header who heads the ball
back to the first server, making the drill continuous.
Coaching Points
The header should head the ball with both feet on the ground to
generate power.

The header should time the jump to head the ball at the highest
possible point.

The header should use the neck and shoulder muscles to generate
force.

The header should strive for height, distance, and accuracy— in that
order.

Coaching Progressions
Servers vary the height and trajectory of service. One player becomes
a defender, opposing the other first passively, then actively. Transfer
the practice into the area in front of the goal. Add a goalkeeper to

develop a functional practice with a center half opposing a center
forward.

Two defenders compete against each other to clear the danger.
Players have more opposition; 2 groups of 4, with a goalkeeper, com-

pete in a realistic goal-attack situation.
Players practice full-scale defensive versus attacking corners. This
is

excellent practice for both attacking and defensive heading.

HEAD TENNIS
This game can be used with players of all abilities, if you modify the rules
to suit their abilities. It is very popular with all levels of players and makes

an enjoyable break from normal training (Figure 11.9).
Equipment
1 soft volleyball; 1

net approximately the height of the players.

Coaching Heading

197

Figure 11.9

Organization

Players are in 2 teams of up to 8 on a volleyball or tennis court or
in the center circle of a standard soccer field. If a net is not available,

leave a central out-of-bounds zone between the teams.
Instructions

For beginners: Players head the ball directly back OR catch it and
serve it to a team member who tries to head it over the net or zone.

For intermediates: Players head the ball directly back OR head it
to a team member who heads it back over the net or zone.

For advanced players: Players head the ball directly back OR head
it among team members no more than 3 times before heading it back
over the net or zone.
Rules for all levels: The game is scored like table tennis. Each team
has 5 serves. The first team to score 21 (or another number the coach
chooses) wins.

A point is scored if the ball bounces on the opponents' side or if
it

is

not returned properly.

A point is lost

if

the ball fails to clear the net or bounces out of court

or if the ball is not played over the net according to the rules.

Final Point

Even with the best coaching, and especially if you use a regular soccer

may still develop headaches if they practice too long. Thereheading practices should be frequent but short.

ball, players

fore,

CHAPTER 12

Coaching Goalkeeping
The goalkeeper is the single most important position on the field. A good
goalkeeper not only prevents the opposition from scoring but inspires
the defense and by quick skillful distribution contributes to the attack.
I

feel that many coaches neglect the goalkeepers, partly because the posi-

tion is sometimes difficult to coach and partly because coaches devote

the majority of their time to the majority of their players, who are outfield players.

This chapter should provide you with a useful insight into the coaching of goalkeeping and persuade you that the best way to help your

goalkeepers improve is to provide them with at least one special session
a week. This session should be a 35-minute (or more) coaching session
individually designed for goalkeepers, held before regular practice begins or at a separate time in the week. If you have an assistant coach you

may be able to work with goalkeepers during regular practice, but if not,
you may be surprised how willingly outfield players will attend special
sessions for goalkeepers.

Selecting Your Goalkeepers

A well-organized squad should have two regular goalkeepers plus at least
two other players who are capable of goalkeeping. Indeed, 1 believe that
all players should try the goalkeeper position at some time. There are
three reasons for this. First, by engaging everyone in goalkeeper practice.

199

200

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

you are better able to identify natural talent. Second, you have a responsibility to give all your players a soccer education, and this includes goalkeeping. Third, this practice gives everyone personal knowledge of the
position and thus encourages an appreciation of and respect for whoever
plays in goal, especially if he or she makes a mistake.
Discovering natural goalkeeping ability can be very enjoyable for all
concerned if you build a group session around the practice called High
Hand/Low Hand (p. 208). In choosing a goalkeeper you will also look for
desirable physical characteristics; there is no doubt that height is an advantage to a goalkeeper. Other qualities are also important, such as gymnastic agility, flexibility, speed of reaction, a sense of position, and
courage. These are all desirable qualities and are essential for top-class
players.

Goalkeeper Safety
The coach has a special duty to the goalkeeper. No goalkeeper should
have to practice in a worn, rutted, perhaps muddy area in front of the
goal. A good coach will provide the best possible practice surface for the
goalkeeper; often this is found in the area under the goal net. To expose
this area, simply reverse the goal net and shoot into the back of the goal.
This means that you have both a goal and a net (which is realistic), and
you have also provided a safe surface (Figure 12.1). Portable, tubular goals
are ideal, and every school should have at least one pair.
The second way to ensure safety is through good player discipline in
the penalty area. No player should be allowed to simply blast off at the

and two or more players should never shoot simultaneously.
Not all experienced goalkeepers like to wear protective clothing or
devices such as knee and elbow protectors. Perhaps goalkeepers shouldn't
be required to wear these during a match, but in practice sessions I always
goal,

advise the use of protective clothing. Sweatpants, long-sleeved uniforms,

and pads should all be a part of the team equipment and should be provided for the goalkeepers— prevention of injuries is always better than
cure.

Goalkeeper Warm-Ups
Goalkeepers, like outfield players, should follow a careful, individually
designed, and systematic warm-up program. Prior to a coaching session,
I

recommend the following sequence of activities.

Coaching Goalkeeping

201

Figure 12.1
Provide a safe surface for the goalkeeper to practice on.

General Jogging
Goalkeepers can do this with the outfield players because the aim is the

same— to increase heart rate, raise the body temperature, and stimulate
the circulation prior to strenuous exercise.

Rolling
Next, goalkeepers roll on the ground in all directions mostly in the sitting
or tuck position with the hands clasped around the knees and the chin

202

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

down. In this safe sitting position, players can roll in different directionsforward, backward, and side to side.

Stretching and Mobilizing
Goalkeepers stay seated on the ground and use progressive static stretching
to work on the groin, spine, neck, arms, and shoulders. Players should

not use any bouncing or ballistic exercises at the start of the sequence.
Players stand up and continue working on the groin, hamstrings, and
arms and shoulders and then gradually and very gently begin to flex and
extend the spine. They gradually involve the arms and shoulders and
begin swinging movements to extend the range and speed of the movements. At this point they are ready to begin more explosive moves.

Explosive and Jumping Movements
Powerful, explosive, springing movements are essential in goalkeeping
for diving saves and for dealing with high balls. Players must therefore
train for these movements but again should start gently with actions that

employ perhaps 40% to 50% effort. Vertical jumping and one-footed takeoffs with one or both arms raised simultaneously as if catching or punching a ball are ideal. Then players can work increasing on the power of
the movements— jumping to block a ball thrown just over the cross bar
(as in volleyball) is a good example. Also, the goalkeeper can practice pressure training to catch high balls thrown at short intervals toward different
parts of the goal, perhaps by two or more servers. Catching a series of
balls 2 feet above normal stretch height is good hard training and is very
skill related.

Diving Movements
always complete my warm-ups with simple diving movements to safely
introduce the necessary body-to-ground contact, but 1 include more "fall-

I

ing on the ball" activities than actual diving. (Diving is included in skill
training practices, which always include a ball.) The goalkeepers, fully

protected, simply toss the ball into the air and fall on it when it lands,

hugging it to the body. As the activity progresses, encourage them to
throw the ball higher and farther away so that they have to move several
yards to get to the bounce of the ball, always trying to fall down vertically
upon it. Finally encourage them to roll after smothering the ball. The full
sequence then becomes throw, move, fall, and roll; this provides a very

Coaching Goalkeeping

203

demanding yet satisfying drill. At this stage no full sideways diving movements are made— these come later in the section dealing with skill and
reaction drills.

Skills Practice
After completing all other warm-ups, goalkeepers should then practice

game skills.

Dealing With Sitots

— Tlie Basic Tecitniques

The goalkeeper spends the major part of the game dealing with shots
at goal. This is certainly exciting to coach because it involves both diving

and catching skills and intelligent decision making about positional play.
The goalkeeper's work can also be risky, so good discipline in your shooting practices is essential.

The Basic Stance
Like the receiver in tennis, the goalkeeper must be able to react quickly
in any direction. To achieve this, the body position is slightly crouched,

with the feet shoulder-width apart, weight forward on the balls of the
feet, and the hands held above waist height with palms forward and
fingers spread (Figure 12.2). The goalkeeper's body should be still at the
moment the attacker shoots, and the goalkeepers eyes should be fixed

on the ball.

Figure 12.2

The goalkeeper's stance.

204

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Catching the Ball
While the hands catch the ball first (later I include practices for catching
the ball with the hands only), complete safety is ensured if the ball can
also be clutched into the chest or the stomach as a second barrier. Teaching this method first highlights the vital skill of getting as much of the

body into the path of the ball as possible, which requires good footwork.
This double barrier, hands and body, can be emphasized by drawing
attention to the two sounds made by a perfect execution. The first sound
is the
is

slap of the ball into the hands; the second is made when the ball

pulled into the body (Figures 12.3a and b).

Figure 12.3

Two-sound catching.

Catching the Ball Above Chest Height

A ball that arrives high up on the chest or just under the chin can be awkward to hold unless the goalkeeper uses an overhand grip, with one hand
above and one below the ball (Figure 12.4).

Ground Shots
Shots along the ground range from those that roll gently toward the
goalkeeper to those that are driven hard over a possibly bumpy, uneven
surface. To collect the former, the goalkeeper simply bends from the waist,

places the feet together just in case there is an awkward final bounce,

and lets the ball roll up into his or her hands (Figure 12.5).

Coaching Goalkeeping

205

Figure 12.4
Proper hand position for catching a ball above chest height.

Figure 12.5
Fielding a weak ground shot.

Dealing with a hard driven shot is more serious. The goalkeeper should
sideways to the ball, drop down on one knee with the knee

first turn

so close to the other foot that no space exists for the ball to run through,
and make a wide cradle with the hands and arms (Figures 12.6a and b).

Now if the ball comes awkwardly, the goalkeeper has at least two effective barriers against making a mistake.

Goalkeeping Drills
Drills for

goalkeepers often serve a dual purpose; what is a learning

experience for a beginner can be a warm-up drill for an experienced

206

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 12.6
Fielding a hard shot or a shot on uneven ground.

goalkeeper. Perhaps the best example of this is the very popular drill called
Fingers, so named because of the sounds made when the server volleys

the ball and when the goalkeeper takes the shot in the hands. When the
drill is

done well, the two "pings" are most impressive.

FINGERS

Figure 12.7

Coaching Goalkeeping

207

Equipment
1 ball for

each 2 players.

Organization

Players are in pairs (1 server, 1 goalkeeper) in free space standing
8 to 4 yards apart— the closer the players, the more difficult the drill
for the goalkeeper.

Instructions

The server volleys the ball to the goalkeeper. The goalkeeper takes
the ball with the hands only, but with the body behind the line of
flight (Figure 12.7).

Coaching Points
The goalkeeper should use good footwork, weight forward, and so
on, and keep the hands in the
formation (fingers spread wide
behind the ball, thumbs almost together).

W

The goalkeeper should receive the ball rather than snatch at it.
Even though the goalkeeper takes the ball with the hands, he or
she should try to get the body into the line of flight.
Coaching Progressions
Progression with this practice depends upon service. To increase
difficulty, decrease the distance, vary the height, and increase the
force of the serve.

Advanced Drills
All goalkeeper drills, at an advanced level, require partner activity. The

server can, from different ranges and at different speeds, roll, pass, throw,
kick, volley, and dribble the ball to the goalkeeper, depending upon which

technique the goalkeeper needs to improve. To progress such drills,
change them into pressure training (chapter 21).
For advanced drills, refer also to the chapters on shooting and tactics
at corners and free kicks (chapters 10 and 16), which contain many excellent situations for realistic goalkeeper training.

Diving and Punciiing Saves
"If you can, catch the ball; if you can't, punch it." This is a useful way
to tell your goalkeepers that catching the ball is usually better than punch-

ing it away because the goalkeeper retains possession. However, to try
to catch and to fail could be disastrous, so good judgment is essential

and must be developed through realistic drills.

208

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Diving Saves
Diving saves are the most spectacular and enjoyable of all the goalkeeper
moves. When saves are taught properly, players love them. Diving saves
do involve an element of danger, so please note the safety precautions
given earlier and progress your players slowly through the following
practices.

Sitting and Catctiing

The player sits with legs straight. When the ball is thrown, the player
catches it and rolls sideways (Figure 12.8).

Figure 12.8
Sitting and catching.

Kneeling and Catching

The player, kneeling, stretches to the side, catches the ball, and rolls
(Figure 12.9). The player should not land on the point of the elbow but
should turn the shoulder underneath for safety (Figures 12.10a and b).

Punctiing—High Hand/Low Hand

Now the goalkeeper is ready to dive for balls that are beyond catching
reach. He or she has to learn to punch with the hand and fist, which gives

the greatest distance on the stretch diagonal (the line through the body

from one foot to the opposite arm and hand). Goalkeepers can reach

Coaching Goalkeeping

209

Figure 12.9
Kneeling and catching.

//\\

Figure 12.10

When diving, the goalkeeper should not land on the point of the elbow (a)
but should turn the shoulder under (b).

farther if they use the high hand for the aerial shot and the low hand
for the ground shot. The goalkeeper always starts in the kneeling posi-

tion (Figure 12.11).

The ideal width of the goals for this practice is twice the height of the
goalkeeper. Players love this practice and usually forget that they are
diving on quite a hard surface. Further, they begin to make decisions for

themselves, which is what goalkeeping is all about.

Teaching the Full Dive
Only if goalkeepers enjoy the simple diving practices just described should
you teach the full dive. Find a soft surface and then follow these steps.

210

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

\>

P>

Figure 12.11

Use the top hand to defend against high shots.

Stage 1: The goalkeeper crouches, back to the coach. The coach stands
holding the ball (Figure 12.12a).
Stage 2: The coach makes a loud, sharp command, like "Now!" or

at body length distance

"Go!"
The goalkeeper turns and dives to take the ball from the coach's hands
at full stretch (Figure 12.12b).

(Cont.)

Figure 12.12
Goalkeeper's diving practice.

Coaching Goalkeeping

211

Figure 12.12 (Continued)
Goalkeeper's diving practice.

Stage 3: The goalkeeper takes the ball at full stretch and then hits the
ball down onto the ground in order to cushion the landing (Figure 12.12c).

By using this method, the goalkeeper learns how to react to a sudden
command; in the general excitement, thoughts of injury or discomfort

when diving never occur. Also, the goalkeeper learns how to use the ball
to break the fall. After this practice, put the goalkeeper back into goals,

continue the normal shooting practices, and encourage the full dive
whenever you can. Remember, however, that the goalkeeper enjoys the

212

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

shots he or she saves, so control the service to benefit the goalkeeper,

not the shooters.

Dealing With Crosses
All good goalkeepers love to demonstrate their skill at catching a high
ball crossed in from the wings. This is a spectacular move, which requires
a high degree of positional sense and perfect timing of the jump to ensure
that the ball is taken at full strength and at the highest possible point in

the air.

To gain maximum height, the player must make the jump off one foot
ideally after a short run toward the ball, so that the nontake-off leg can

also generate lift with a powerful, bent-knee action. As the player's arms
and fingers reach upward, the eyes must be fixed on the ball. Indeed,
fixing and keeping the eyes on the ball throughout the complete sequence
is the key to success.

Once the goalkeeper is committed to the move, he

or she must not allow anything to distract the actions of looking at and
catching (or punching) the ball (Figure 12.13).

Figure 12.13
Proper body position for fielding a cross shot.

Both hands should take the ball, with the fingers spread in the
mation around the back of the ball (Figure 12.14).

W

for-

Coaching Goalkeeping

213

Figure 12.14
Proper hand and finger position for fielding a cross shot.

Drills for Beginners

The starting drills are very simple. The coach stands to one side of the
goal and tosses the ball for the goalkeeper to catch as high as possible
in the air. The coach checks the points of technique.

BASIC GOALKEEPING

Equipment
1 ball for 1 player and the coach.

Organization
1 player acts as goalkeeper and stands on the middle of the goal line.

Instructions

The player is positioned so that he or she can see both the ball and
the incoming attackers. The goalkeeper's stance is always slightly
open to the field of play.
The player moves toward the ball if possible and jumps off one foot,
bringing the other knee up high to add vertical lift.

The player takes the ball at the highest possible point, using both
hands in the
formation.

W

On landing, the player crouches down and protects both him- or
herself and the ball.

214

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Drills for Intermediates

These drills are similar to beginner drills, but the coach moves farther
and farther away to increase the height and distance of the service. This
leads to the ball being volleyed or kicked across to add to the realism.
As the goalkeeper improves, opposing players are introduced, which leads
to the next section for more advanced practices.

Drills for Advanced Goalkeepers

The introduction of more players, both attackers and defenders, into the
drill makes the actual technique of catching the ball more difficult, because
the goalkeeper is now in a crowded situation and may not have a clear
route to the ball. It also requires the goalkeeper to make the same kinds
of mental decisions as required in a game. The two most important decisions are (1) leaving the goal to try to reach the ball versus staying in the
goal to see what happens and (2) catching the ball versus punching it

away.
In this kind of drill, the goalkeeper has to make decisions about what
to do,

which requires the coach to coach the mind of the goalkeeper.

CROSSES AND SHOTS

Figure 12.15

Coaching Goalkeeping

215

Equipment

Ample balls, at least 1 for each player.
Organization

Players are in groups of 10 (6 servers, 3 shooters, 1 goalkeeper) on
a standard soccer field. Three servers are on each side of the penalty

area and 3 shooters are in the D, as shown in Figure 12.15. The goal-

keeper is in the goal.
Instructions

The goalkeeper collects a high cross from one of the servers and then
rolls the ball to one of the shooters, who takes an immediate shot
at goal.

Coaching Progressions
A shooter moves in to the cross, and the goalkeeper must decide

whether to stay in the goal or leave it.

A player making a cross tries to float the ball into the goal and score.
A player making a cross aims for the farside servers, who become
strikers.

The goalkeeper has defenders: initially a center half, then 2 backs,
then full defense.
Players progress to wave attacks (chapters 17 and 18).
Players practice tactics at corners (chapter 16).

Diving at tlie Feet of an Attaclcer
This is the most difficult of the goalkeeper techniques; it requires skill,
timing, and courage. This skill is for advanced players only and requires
careful coaching to impress upon the attacker that he or she is there to

help the goalkeeper, not to score at any cost.
This drill involves the goalkeeper moving out of goal and competing
an attacker who has broken through the defense. The

1 vs. 1 against

goalkeeper tries to jockey and position to force the attacker to move in
a certain direction. (Players usually move toward their right side because
they are more confident with their right foot, and this knowledge should
help the goalkeeper.) Having made the attacker move in a sideways direction, the goalkeeper dives in at the feet of the attacker and smothers the
ball. The drill has four stages, and the goalkeeper has four decisions to

make.
First, the goalkeeper must determine the exact

moment to start moving

out of the goal toward the attacker. If the goalkeeper moves too soon,
the attacker can simply chip the ball over the goalkeeper into an empty

216

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

goal. If the goalkeeper moves too late, the angle is not reduced and the

attacker has a very wide target at which to shoot.

1

tell

the goalkeeper

to stay back until the attacker crosses the penalty area line and then make

a swift but balanced move forward (Figure 12.16a).

Second, the goalkeeper must try to force the attacker to move sideways
away from the direct line toward the goal (Figure 12.16b).
Third, the goalkeeper must time the start of the dive by waiting until
the ball is being played sideways by the attacker (Figure 12.16c).

Fourth, the goalkeeper must time the actual dive in such a way that
the hands and arms gather the ball at the same time the body presents
as long a barrier as possible to the attacker (Figure 12.16d).

(Cont.)

Figure 12.16
When defending an attack the goalkeeper a) moves forward and b) forces the
attacker to move sideways.

Coaching Goalkeeping

217

Figure 12.16 (Continued)

The goalkeeper c) starts the dive and d) gathers the ball with the hands and
arms.

Practice Drills
Attackers simply dribble the ball into the penalty area and try to score.
The difficulty is increased for the goalkeeper by the speed and realism
of the attack.

218

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Narrowing the Angle and Judging Angles
When the goalkeeper moves off the line and goes to meet the attacker,
we call this narrowing the angle. By moving forward, the goalkeeper
reduces the target area (Figures 12.17 and 12.18).

T
Figure 12.17
Goalkeeper stays on the goal line and leaves space for the shooter.

Figure 12.18
Goalkeeper moves forward to narrow the angle and denies the shooter space
to aim at.

Coaching Goalkeeping

219

Timing the Move
Timing relies on the goalkeeper's judgment, but the best general advice
is for the goalkeeper to wait on the goal line until the attacker moves into
the penalty area, then move forward.

Judging Angles
The goalkeeper always moves toward the player with the ball but must
do so with regard to the position of the goals. In particular, the goalkeeper
should always protect the near post (Figure 12.19).

Figure 12.19

The goalkeeper always moves to protect the near post.

Note: The best way to teach your goalkeeper to find the correct angle
bottom of each

is to use a piece of cord 20 yards long. Tie the ends to the

post and take the apex of the triangle to the ball; the resulting lines tell
the goalkeeper exactly where to stand.

Drills for Beginners

A good way to teach the concept of positioning to a novice goalkeeper
is

to use the practice called clock shooting (Figure 12.20).

CLOCK SHOOTING
Equipment
1 ball for each player.

Organization
Players are in a group of unlimited number in a semicircle around the

penalty area of a standard soccer field. The shooters are numbered
as shown in Figure 12.20. The goalkeeper stands in front of the goal.

220

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 12.20

Instructions

The shooters shoot only when their numbers are called.

The goalkeeper positions himself or herself for each shot. The
goalkeeper must be given time to position between each shot.
Coaching Points
Goalkeepers should protect the near post, narrow the angle, and
be still at the moment the shot is released.
Coaching Progression

The shooters increase the speed at which they release their shots.

Drills for Intermediates

Clock shooting is fine for the novice but it takes time and is not suffidynamic for improving goalkeepers— this next drill is (Figure

ciently
12.21).

Coaching Goalkeeping

221

ALTERNATE SHOTS

Figure 12.21

Equipment

Ample balls; 1 flag or cone.
Organization

Players are in teams of 4 (1 goalkeeper, 1 shooter, 2 servers) on a
standard soccer field. The shooter operates from an area just inside
the penalty area, from behind a central cone or flag (Figure 12.21).
The servers, with ample soccer balls, stand by each goalpost.
Instructions

The shooter runs behind the cone, shoots, and runs to the opposite
side of the penalty area.

The servers roll the ball so as to feed the shooter at a reasonable rate.
The goalkeeper positions correctly for each shot from left and right
alternately.

222

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Coaching Points
The goalkeeper should move quickly as the ball rolls toward the
shooter.

The goalkeeper should orient himself or herself from the near post
and remember to guard the near side first.

The goalkeeper should be still just before the shot is released.
Coaching Progressions
A second shooter, when called, has to dribble a ball into the area,
dribble past the goalkeeper,

and score.

This forces the goalkeeper into a 1 vs. 1 situation and calls for the
ability not only to narrow the angle but to dive at the feet of the

oncoming player.

Drills for Advanced Players

THREE-SIDED GOAL

Figure 12.22

Equipment

Ample balls; 3 corner flags.

Coaching Goalkeeping

223

Organization
Players are in teams of 4 (1 goalkeeper, 3 shooters), in a 3-sided goal,
with flags about 8 yards apart (Figure 12.22).
Instructions

The goalkeeper moves to each goal in sequence and reacts according
to each shooter, whose only instruction is to score. The shooters

may elect to shoot or to dribble.
The shooters must realize that it is their aim to get the goalkeeper
to make a good save. They are there to bring the best out of the
keeper, and they should shoot accordingly.
Coaching Points

As for clock shooting.
Coaching Progressions
Players increase the speed of the practice.

Distributing tite Ball
The goalkeeper needs to be able to distribute the ball both by kicking (for
distance) and by throwing (for speed and accuracy). He or she must also
know when to use the different techniques to set up an attacking move
quickly, often by switching play, and when to wait with the ball until
team members have moved forward into balanced attacking positions.

Kicking
The goalkeeper should be encouraged to take all goal kicks to relieve other
players from this sometimes tiring duty. Perhaps more importantly, the
goalkeeper must be expert at the volley kick. (Both kicks are covered in
detail in chapter 9.) When volleying, the goalkeeper must also be taught
that a kick that produces a ball dropping vertically down is much harder
for the forwards to control than a ball with a flatter trajectory. Forwards

much prefer balls approaching with flat trajectories, either to control or
to play backward behind the defense.

The difference in the trajectory is caused by the way the voUeyer places
the ball on the foot. Simply tossing the ball into the air and kicking it
produces the trajectory shown in Figure 12.23a. Placing the ball down

on the instep produces a flatter kick, which results in the trajectory shown
in Figure 12.23b.

224

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 12.23

A ball that is a) hard and b) easy for the receiver to control.

Distribution by Hand
Goalkeepers can use three popular techniques for throwing: the javelin
throw, the overhead throw, and the roll. The roll is very accurate over
short distances and is easy for the receiver to control because it has no
sidespin. Its weakness is that it can only be used over short distances.
The more common techniques are the powerful javelin and overhead
throws, which are worth examining in detail.

•

The Javelin Throw
The javelin throw for soccer is the same kind used in baseball and cricket.
The ball is thrown hard and flat, which is achieved when the elbow leads
the throwing action. The goalkeeper must practice until he or she can
make this throw without imparting sidespin, which complicates the
control for the receiving player (Figure 12.24).

The Overhead Throw
The overhead throw is similar to the hook pass in basketball. The
goalkeeper stands sideways and uses a long, windmill arm action to
achieve sufficient height to clear opposing players (Figure 12.25).

The Goalkeeper Game
The goalkeeper game is an excellent conclusion to this chapter, because
it provides an enjoyable practice situation to develop most of the skills

Coaching Goalkeeping

225

Figure 12.24

Arm position for the javelin throw.

Figure 12.25

Arm position for the overhead throw.

discussed in this chapter, from kicking and throwing to narrowing the
angle and dealing with shots (Figure 12.26).

GOALKEEPER GAME
Equipment

Ample balls; 2 portable goals or sets of flags.

226

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

6 yd

12 yd

Figure 12.26

Organization

2 goalkeepers practice against each other, protecting 2 opposing
goals 20 yards apart, as shown in Figure 12.26.
Instructions

The game starts when one goalkeeper takes a dead ball kick from
the 6-yard line and tries to score past his opponent. This kick also
restarts the game whenever a shot misses the goal and the ball goes
out of play or when there is a dispute of any kind not covered in
the rules.
receiving goalkeeper catches his opponent's shot, he or she
can then shoot back by using a volley or half-volley from the point
at which the catch was made. This is a considerable advantage.
If the

If the receiving goalkeeper parries the shot but fails to catch it, then

he or she takes a 6-yard kick.
Note: If the ball rebounds over the center line, the goalkeeper loses
possession. This encourages the goalkeepers to pounce on any ball

they cannot hold.
If a ball rebounds

from the goalposts, the goalkeeper takes a 6-yard

kick.

The players can set any number of goals as the target or play for
a predetermined time.

The goalkeepers can elect to throw at the goal rather than kick.
Note: This game is great fun and is ideal practice for goalkeepers,

who can learn to deal with realistic shots and practice their kicking
and throwing.

CHAPTER 13

Coaching the
Throw-In
Every player must be able to execute a good throw-in; this is the most
common way of restarting the game and when done well has great tactical
value. Unfortunately, many young players find it a difficult skill to learn,

and even professional players make mistakes.
The key to teaching beginners is to have them throw the ball over an
obstacle, ideally the goals. By concentrating on height rather than distance and by using a square, two-foot placement, young players will learn
the correct throwing action and will not be likely to foul. The key to
successful tactics is to encourage players to think quickly and to practice
set plays.

The Basic Action
To execute the throw-in, the player must face the field of play, throw
the ball with both hands from behind the head, and keep both feet on
or behind the touchline and in contact with the ground throughout the
throw.
Facing the field and staying behind the line are easily done; releasing
a balanced two-handed throw while keeping the feet on the ground is
more difficult, especially when trying to achieve a long throw.

227

228

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Holding the Ball
The player holds the ball on the ends of the fingers with the hands behind
the ball in the

W formation (Figure 13.1).

Figure 13.1
Correct hand position for the throw-in.

The Throwing Action
The body arches backward and then uncoils in a natural sequence: first
the upper body, then the arms, and finally the fingers with an important
snap-down action at the moment of release, which helps to generate
power (Figure 13.2).
To ensure that the ball is released from behind the head, the beginner
should concentrate on releasing the ball with a high trajectory; aiming
at the feet of a receiver comes later. As with all throwing actions, a good
follow-through is important to achieve accuracy and distance.

Footwork
Keeping both feet on the ground, especially when attempting a long
throw, can cause problems even for experienced players. Often the player,
quite legitimately, takes a few running steps to gain momentum. But when
the ball is thrown, this same momentum causes the back foot to lift off

Coaching the Throw-In

229

Figure 13.2
Correct body position for the ttirow-in.

the ground. To prevent this, I advise that beginners use a square, two-

footed (London Bridge) stance. The players can run as fast as they like,
but by split-stepping into a square, two-footed stance, they will keep both
feet on the ground. However hard players throw, their feet wUl not leave
the ground until the ball has been released.
I recommend teaching beginners to throw the ball to each other over
the top of the goals. In this way, players concentrate on height, and a
foul throw becomes almost impossible (Figure 13.3).

®
/^

Figure 13.3

230

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

OVER THE GOAL
Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players; goals or other barriers.

Organization

Players are in pairs on each side of a barrier, ideally the goals, over

which the players can throw.
Instructions

Players throw the ball to their partners, aiming for height before
distance.

Coaching Points
Players should face forward, feet shoulder- width apart.
Players should hold the ball in the

W formation.

Players should arch back, uncoU their bodies, and release balls above
their heads on a high trajectory.

The fingers should snap down as they release the ball.
Coacliing Progressions

The distance from the goals increases.
Players try to throw the ball over the goals from the penalty spot

and the penalty area line.

Faults and Corrections
The two most common faults (after the foot fault) are throwing the ball
with one hand too dominant and releasing the ball too late and thus not
from behind the head. Again 1 can recommend a useful method of overcoming both problems simultaneously.
The player and coach stand as shown in Figure 13.4— one of the coach's
hands covering the ball when the player has adopted the ready position.
Now, as the player attempts to throw, the coach gently resists the movement at the correct point of release. This gives the player the kinesthetic
feel of the correct action (chapter 2).

The Long Throw
The long throw is a very useful tactic and when executed near the opponent's goal line can be almost as good as a corner kick because of the
greater accuracy of the throw.

Coaching the Throw-In

231

Figure 13.4

A technique for helping a player get the feel of correct positioning.

Drills for Beginners
Players move farther and farther away from the goal, still throwing over

the crossbar.

Drills for Intermediates
Intermediates can now add accuracy to distance and try to hit a target
(Figure 13.5).

TARGET THROW-IN
Equipment
1 ball for each 2 players; 3 or 4 flags.

Organization

Players are in pairs, standing near flags arranged at different distances.
Instructions

Players take turns trying to hit each flag with the ball.

Coaching Points
Reinforce the concept of aiming at a target. Be on the watch for a
foul throw and for one hand becoming dominant.

232

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 13.5

Coaching Progressions
Players throw from the sideline into the penalty area and then into

the goal area.

Drills for Advanced Players

We now move into simple tactics, starting with the following move to
exploit a long throw. Now the target becomes the forehead of a player,
who tries to back-head the ball (head the ball backward) farther into the
goal area (Figure 13.6). The progression for this move is to have a third

player waiting for the back-header to try a shot or a head at the goal.

Tactics in Attacic
The faster a player thinks, the more likely he or she is to gain a tactical
advantage. This advice is especially true with the free kick and the throwin. Some players do not naturally respond quickly and will need to work
to develop this skill. You cannot stress too often the basic tactic for throwins, which is to take the throw quickly whenever possible.
The second tactical thought that you should try to develop in the minds
of your players is to throw the ball forward. The rules of the game state
that a player cannot be given offside (penalized for infringing the offside

law) directly from a throw-in. Throwing the ball forward toward the opponent's goal keeps the attacking momentum going and often results in getting a player deep into the opposition's defense. The "no offside" rule

Coaching the Throw-In

233

Figure 13.6
Field position for tlie tactic of passing to a teammate wtio will head the ball
into the goal.

at throw-ins is a tremendous advantage if used correctly; this advantage
is often lost if the ball is

thrown in square or even backward. Of course,

balls are thrown square or backward in professional soccer and resulting

plays used to good advantage, but this is seldom the case with young
players. Indeed, a ball thrown backward to an inexperienced player, often
the fullback, can be disastrous. Nothing is worse for a defender receiving
such a throw than the feeling of insecurity that occurs when an attacker

rushes in to charge down the kick (bodily block the kick).

Throwing and Receiving— The Basic Duties
Sometimes a quick throw-in is not possible. Therefore, all players must
be coached in the basic duties of being a thrower and receiver.

The Basic Duties of the Thrower
The thrower must face the field of play and look for the player who is
in the best position (i.e., closest to the opponents' goal or not covered).

The thrower then must catch the attention of that player, either by calling the player's name or by establishing eye contact.

234

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The thrower must direct the throw to either the head or the feet but
never the body of the receiver, so the receiver can play the ball immediately without having to control it first.
The thrower then must move onto the field of play and be ready to
kick any return pass, ideally directly forward toward the opponent's goal.

The Basic Duties of the Receiver
The receiver must take up a position at least 10 yards away from the
thrower.

The receiver must take note of the nearest defender and decide exactly

how much time and space he or she has to work within.
The receiver must either control the ball and turn toward the goal (if
he or she is not closely covered) or play the ball back immediately to the
thrower with the foot or the head. (Very seldom in junior soccer is the
thrower covered by a defender.)
Finally, and most importantly, the receiver must accept the responsibility to trigger the throw. The thrower may have the ball, but the quick,
signaled reaction of the receiver actually starts the move. Receivers can
and must make decoy runs and moves to create opportunities for the
thrower. These moves have to be coached and practiced, which takes us
on to the next section on positional play.
Players who crowd around the thrower (Figure 13.7) deny themselves
the space, and therefore the time, to play the ball. Overcrowding around

Figure 13.7
Players are too close to the thrower

Coaching the Throw-In

235

the thrower is all too often a feature of poor team coaching of throw-ins,

and players cannot be taught too soon how to adopt the much wider,
open positions shown in Figure 13.8.

Figure 13.8
Players are well positioned.

The Basic Move in Attack
If

the receivers do position themselves 10 yards from the thrower, yet

a quick throw to an unmarked player is not possible, the thrower can

use a simple but very effective basic move. This move enables the thrower
to move onto the field with enough space to kick a long ball forward into
the opposition's defense— after, of course, the ball has been skillfully

returned to the thrower by a receiver.
The thrower throws to a receiver positioned 10 yards away (Figure
13.9a).

The receiver returns the ball, which ideally rolls gently toward the
thrower (Figure 13.9b).
The thrower enters the field of play and either plays the ball forward
or dribbles (Figure 13.9c).

236

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

10 yd

Figure 13.9

A basic attack move may be practiced where the thrower a) throws to a
receiver, b) waits for the receiver to gently return the ball,
ball forward or dribbles it.

Drills for Beginners

BASIC THROW-IN

Figure 13.10

Equipment
1 ball for each 3 players.

and c) plays the

Coaching the Throw-In

237

Organization

Players are in groups of 3 (2 attackers, 1 defender), standing near
a line that represents a sideline (Figure 13.10).
Instructions

The receiver (Player B) triggers the practice by moving.

The thrower (Player A) aims at Player B's head or feet.
Player B plays the ball back using the head or feet.

The defender (Player Z) tries to stop the move.
Coaching Points
Player B should be at least 10 yards from Player A.
Player A must throw to Player B's feet and then move forward onto
the field.

Player B should try to make an effective and well-timed move to
slip away from the defender and should give a quality return pass

to Player A.

Drills for Intermediates

2 VS. 3

Equipment
1 ball for each 5 players.

Instructions

Players are in groups of 5 (3 attackers, 2 defenders) standing near
a line that represents a sideline (Figure 13.11). The attackers try to
keep possession and make 3 successful passes.

Figure 13.11

238

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Coaching Points
Players B and C should move in relation to each other and Player A.
Drills for Advanced Players

We now develop the 3 vs. 2 situation (Figure 13.12) and introduce more
advanced moves such as crossover plays, which create space for other
attackers and the direct overhead kick.

CROSSOVER PLAYS

Figure 13.12

Equipment
1 ball for each 5 players.

Organization

Players in groups of 5 (3 attackers, 2 defenders) as shown in Figure
13.12.

Instructions

Player A triggers the move by running directly toward Player B.
Player B reacts by sprinting past Player A and through the vacated

space to receive a forward throw from Player C.

Coaching Points
Player A should call and move in a sufficiently convincing manner to
deceive Player Y into moving with Player A and thus out of position.

Coaching the Throw-In

239

Player B should wait a second before reacting (giving Player Y time
to be deceived) and should always run forward on the outside of

Player A.
Player C should pretend to throw to Player A but actually delay

throwing until Player B is well forward. Player C should then throw
the ball beyond Player B for him or her to move toward.

CREATING SPACE FOR OTHERS
In this drill, Player B (the attacker nearest the thrower) moves upfield

taking Player Y out of position and creating space and for Player C to

move into and execute a move.

Figure 13.13

Equipment
1 ball for each 5 players.

Organization

Players are in groups of 5 (3 attackers, 2 defenders) as shown in

Figure 13.13.
Instructions

Player B triggers the move by moving upfield taking Player Y out
of position. (If Player Y fails to react, then Player B will obviously

be ideally placed to receive the throw.)

Y does react. Player C moves into the space left by Player
B and executes the basic move.
If Player

240

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Coaching Points
Player B should make a positive move, because either outcome is
successful; as there is no offside from a throw-in, the move gives

an additional advantage of creating depth in attack.
Player C should wait a second before reacting.

Player C can also decoy Player Y by pretending to move away from
the thrower before actually moving toward him or her.
Player A should watch what is happening and make the most effective response.

Tactics Using a Longer Throw
This next play, which is very successful in games, requires a deep-lying
player (usually a fullback) to make a forward run behind those appai-ently

engaged in the throw-in. The thrower simply uses a long throw over the
heads of the players to land the ball at the feet of the running player.
Naturally this play has to be rehearsed, as do all set play moves.
In Figure 13.14, Players A and B move in close to the thrower as Player
C runs down the field behind them.

Figure 13.14

A and B move in close to the thrower so that C can move straight down the
field behind them.

Coaching the Throw-In

241

Tactics in Defense
Organizing defense for throw-ins requires four essential tactics. Time and
circumstances may prevent players from achieving all four safeguards on
every occasion, but players should aim to achieve them.

One-On-One Marking
First,

every potential receiver should be covered on a one-on-one basis.

This means that sufficient players must run hard to cover each attacker—
this usually involves forwards helping the defense.

Get Goalside
Second, all defenders should position themselves goalside of the attacker
they are marking so that each defender can always see the attacker he
or she is covering as well as the thrower. This means defenders must
move when the attacker moves to avoid being caught out of position.

Cover the Thrower

We have already discussed how attackers can play the ball back to an
unmarked thrower, who can then play the ball forward. Accordingly,
defensive players must cover the thrower so that the opposition cannot
use this move. The best player to cover the thrower is the winger who
plays on the same side of the field, especially since he or she can also
position halfway between the thrower and the opponents' fullback, who
may come forward in support.

Keep a Spare Defender
Finally, a well-organized defense always retains a spare defender behind

the area in which the throw-in is taking place. Ideally, this is the fullback

on whose side the throw is taken.
A good example of defensive cover at a throw-in is given in Figure 13.15,
where all four safeguards are achieved. However, a system of defense
is never infallible— it depends upon the defensive skills of the players concerned (chapter 8).

242

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 13.15
Defensive cover where all four safeguards are achieved.

Drills for Defensive Tactics

Watch your team play in a competitive game and observe how many
times, if at all, they achieve the four safeguards when it is possible for

them to do so. After observing their play, you may need to show them
how and where to position themselves to defend at throw-ins. This can
be done during "chalk-and-talk" sessions but is more effective on the
field in live situations (chapters 17 and 18). In addition to these methods
and practices, I suggest two other approaches.
Divide your squad into groups of 4 or 5 players and let each group,
independently of you and other groups, design their own attacking moves
from a throw-in. Now simply play one group against another and see

how well they defend.
Play attack versus defense practices in a full-game situation and coach
during play (chapter 18).

Coaching the Throw-In

243

You need realistic situations when coaching defense at throw-ins.
Observing what players do when they are tired or have to think for themselves is the key to producing successful team responses during a game.
To react both individually and collectively in any given situation requires
an intelligent understanding of the game of soccer. I hope Part III will
provide some of this knowledge.

PART

TACTICS

AND TEAMWORK
In Part III, I present my ideas on coaching tactics and teamwork. I start
by introducing the work of Allen Wade, who first identified 10 general
principles applicable to team games. I then provide the reader with a brief
history of the way modern systems of play developed, together with an
analysis of their strengths and weaknesses. I provide detailed explanations of tactical moves that can be used at set plays, including attacking
and defensive free kicks and corner kicks. Finally, I present my ideas on
how to coach tactics and teamwork.

245

CHAPTER 14

Understanding

Team Play
One of your main objectives as a coach is to improve team play— but how
do you know how well your team is playing? You can't judge simply by
the result, because your opponents may have been strong or weak; you
can't judge simply by the score, because at any one moment in the game
the score might not be a true reflection of how well the teams are playing. You need a measuring stick, a set of permanent criteria against which
you can analyze how well or how badly your team is playing. You have
to know what to look for; you have to be able to recognize good team play.
This chapter introduces the concepts of team play, which were first
identified by Allen Wade in 1967 and which are still in use.

The Three Common Concepts
start by discussing the three concepts that are common to both attack
and defense. These concepts are possession, support, and communication. These concepts are very closely related, but team analysis always
starts with the same question: Which team has the ball?

I

247

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

248

Possession
If your team has possession of the ball, watch to see how well they keep
possession. A team that continually gives the ball away or makes hap-

hazard passes cannot be playing well. Keeping possession is very important, and players should only lose possession when they have a shot on
goal or attempt a killer pass or dribble. Players should never lose possession in the defending or middle thirds of the field, unless it is a matter
of safety.
If

your team does not have possession of the ball, look to see how hard

the players, both individually and collectively, work to regain possession.

rush into tackles wildly or do not know how to support and
cover each other, then they are playing badly. Even when defending, a
If players

team can still put pressure on their opponents by denying them time and
space to play the ball.

Your first judgment about successful team play is based upon an analyhow well players keep or regain possession. You can now examine
support and communication to identify why players are or are not
sis of

successful.

Support
See if your players are making the right decisions and running hard to
get into good supporting positions when their team has possession. This
feature of good team play is closely associated with the willingness of

players to make unselfish runs. Any team in which players stand and
watch each other will be playing badly. See Figures 14.1 and 14.2 for
examples of poor support and good support. In Figure 14.1, Player A has
no support in attack, and Player Z has no support in defense. In Figure
14.2, Players B, C, and D are all supporting Player A.
The principle of support also operates in defense (Figure 14.3). When
a player goes into a tackle (we call this player the first defender), he or
she should always be supported by a second player (the second defender).
In general, the second defender supports at an angle of 45°, protects the
most direct pathway to goal, and is never more than 10 yards behind the
first defender. Often he or she is much closer than 10 yards, depending

upon the circumstances.

Communication
The final common concept is communication. On a soccer field, good
communication is achieved by looking, calling, and signaling. Good
communication involves talking and calling, not shouting, and for this

Understanding Team Play

249

250

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 14.3

Good support in defense.

reason is an advanced aspect of team play. Watch your players carefully
to determine the quality of communication between them during play.
Also notice how well team members encourage each other, especially

when things are going badly and mistakes are being made. Even young
players can be quite cruel to each other, so encourage positive communication.

An American psychologist, A.T. Welford, showed that the human ear
normally can get the brain to deal with only one message at a time. If
several messages or sounds arrive simultaneously, they have to "wait
in line." Consider how this law affects a soccer player in possession of
the ball. If the player is inundated with shouts from six teammates, he
or she hears only the first call; the remaining five are just background
noise adding to the confusion. Worse, the six players may all be shouting different advice! (See Figure 14.4.) The player can deal only with the
first call, so the first call must be the correct one. You can prompt this
by encouraging players to look and think more and to shout less. This
will help provide good communication.

Understanding Team Play

251

"Kick it"

'My ball"

"Hold it"

Figure 14.4

Too many shouts only confuse.

Common Concepts of Attack and Defense
We now consider the concepts of attack and defense. Every attacking
strategy corresponds with a defensive strategy. The three major concepts
are:

Penetration in attack versus Delay in defense

Width in attack versus Concentration in defense
Mobility in attack versus Balance in defense

Delay in Defense
Delay is important in defense. Slowing the opposition means gaining
valuable time for your team to protect its goal. This holds true on both

an individual and a team basis.
Individually, players must not rush wildly into tackles. They should
remain calm and composed, jockey slowly yet positively, watch the ball,
and try not to be beaten by the opponent. If a defender remains goalside
of an attacker, preventing a direct shot on goal, then that defender is

playing well.

252

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Collectively, two or more players can combine very effectively to prevent

direct progress on their goal. If they cannot regain possession they must
try to delay the attack by forcing the attackers to play the ball sidev^ays

or backward away from the danger area. Defenders should follow two
rules of defense.

Rule 1: The nearest defender to the ball (the first defender) must always
go forward to meet the ball and stop the direct attack.
Rule 2: The supporting defender (the second defender) must cover the
first defender. (The second defender usually stands at an angle of about
45°, never more than 10 yards from the first defender, and blocks the
most direct path to goal.)

Penetration in Attacl<
To counter a delaying tactic, an attacker tries to penetrate defensive territory. Penetration requires fast, direct plays and shots at goal. Again, this
can be achieved both individually and collectively.

The First Attacker
Individually, the attacker who receives the ball (the first attacker) should
be prepared to turn toward the goal (if necessary), take the ball directly
toward the defender, try to outmaneuver the defender, and look for a
chance to either shoot at goal or make a killer pass.

The Second Attacker
The second attacker should be prepared to support the first attacker by
running past defenders and getting goalside of them while watching out
for being caught in an offside trap by the opposition, moving out wide
to create more space for the first attacker, and trying to take out defenders
by running at them (being careful not to obstruct).
If a team is exhibiting good penetration, players move the ball swiftly
and positively toward the opponents' goal and are prepared to shoot,
to dribble past defenders, to make killer or lead passes, and to move forward into strike positions. You must encourage all of these qualities and
attitudes in your players.

Concentration in Defense

An attacker moving into a crowded penalty area is faced with no room
to move forward and not enough space between defenders.

Understanding Team Play

253

If defenders want to make plays difficult for the attackers, the defenders
simply crowd the danger area. This is called concentration, and it is most

useful for comer kicks and free kicks in the penalty area when all or nearly
all

players defend the goal (Figure 14.5).

Figure 14.5

Good concentration in defense.

Width in Attack
To overcome concentration, attackers can use width. If a team attacks on
a wide front, that team automatically stretches the defense across the field
and opens up spaces between defenders, which attackers can exploit
(Figure 14.6).

These concepts provide two more permanent features of team play to
develop. Does your team concentrate its defense in times of need, and

do you have sufficient width in attack to improve your chances of success?

"Honey Pot" Soccer
Let us consider concentration and width in relation to one problem that
all coaches of young players experience— the overcrowding of players

254

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

O

Figure 14.6
Spreading the defense makes attacking easier.

around the ball. This phenomenon of players converging on the ball "like
flies around a honey pot" and making good play impossible is

common

in junior soccer (Figure 14.7).

The solution lies partly in the concepts of "making space" and "going
wide," which are best taught with the small-team games and practices
explained in chapters 4 and 5 and the game of shadow soccer, which is

shown on p. 307. You can also use concepts of width and concentration
to analyze what is happening on the field. When you set up practices
to improve your team in any aspect of play,

you will rely increasingly

upon your knowledge of these concepts.

We now consider the final pair of concepts, mobility and balance.
Mobility in Attacif
Perhaps the worst example of team play is two fullbacks who stand rigidly
in their own half of the field when everyone else is attacking the other
goal. Such a team formation is seldom the fault of the players, who have

probably been told to stay back (Figure 14.8).

Understanding Team Play

255

Figure 14.7

"Honey pot" soccer lacks basic principles of width and balance.

This strategy is wrong on two counts. It is wrong in practice because
these defenders are too far back to support their halfbacks. The fullbacks

can only wait for the ball or for the opposition to arrive, and meanwhile
they lose the possible tactical advantage of catching the opposition in the
offside trap.

Second, this strategy is wrong in principle. Soccer is a fluid, moving
game and can only be played skillfully if all players exercise mobility. They

256

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 14.8

Poor defense by the two fullbacks who lack mobility and should have moved
forward.

must be allowed the freedom to move anywhere at any time in accordance
with their own judgment of the situation. Certainly young players must
be taught to make correct judgments about when, where, and how to
move; as we have seen, this is not an easy task for the coach. Nevertheless, the coach must undertake this task, because if players cannot make
good judgments, a team never will play well.

Understanding Team Play

257

Good mobility in attack is demonstrated by players who change positions skillfully and run off the ball to draw defenders out of position and

open up passing or shooting opportunities. Mobility is also demonstrated
by fullbacks who overlap by moving around and in front of the player
with the ball and by midfield players who run forward into the penalty
area (from where over 80% of all goals are scored). These are all examples of the successful execution of mobility in attack. The counter strategy
in defense is balance.

Balance
Balance is easy to understand if you imagine a child's seesaw. For example, if a winger beats his fullback and all the remaining defenders
immediately rush over to his side of the field, then the defense is clearly
off balance because nobody is left in the goal area (Figure 14.9).

Figure 14.9

Lack of balance resulting from defenders moving over too far.

In an aerial view of the field, a well-balanced defense would show the
formations shown in Figures 14.10a, b, and c, which relate to the different

points of attack.

258

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Understanding Team Play

O

Figure 14.10 (Continued)
Formations for a well-balanced defense for attacks c) from ttie right.

259

CHAPTER 15

Team Formations
and Systems of Play
Every coach must understand the different team formations in order to
organize players to the best advantage. Every coach must also understand
that a system of play is only as good as the players within it. Players,
not team formations, win games. If this were not true, two opposing teams
using the same system would always tie!
Every coach must appreciate that systems of play refer to the 11 vs.
11 game. This poses a problem when coaching youngsters, who cannot
be expected to play a system successfully until they are mature enough
to see what is happening in the entire game and to anticipate how plays
are going to develop. Further, they must also be able to kick the ball at
least 30 yards. In the absence of these abilities, the 11 vs. 11 game inevitably reduces to 20 youngsters all swarming like bees around the ball.
With youngsters, therefore, don't expect too much too soon, and do use
the coaching methods set out in this chapter and in chapter 18.

Development of Systems of Play
Before 1870,

when the rules of soccer were first standardized, teams

played in a 1:2:8 formation (Figure 15.1). There was no passing and no
heading, and players dribbled and hacked (tackled) and occasionally shot
for goal. Dribbling was the main skill. In 1867, the Queens Park team

261

262

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 15.1

The 1:2:8 formation used before soccer rules were standardized.

from Scotland introduced the concept of passing; because of the way long
through-passes began to penetrate the defense, the system changed to
1:2:2:6 (Figure 15.2). Incidentally, the Queens Park team played from 1867
to 1874 withoul having a single goal scored against them.

•

•

"^

•

•

A

[

Figure 15.2

The 1:2:2:6 formation used after passing was introduced.

Team Formations and Systems of Play

263

Increasingly, soccer became a game in which team effort was more

important than individual talent. As a result, the next system to develop
was the attacking center half. This player was the best on the team, and
his main duty was to link attack and defense together (Figure 15.3).

The attacking
center half

Figure 15.3

The formation using the attacl<ing center half.

In 1925, the new offside law reduced the number of players who had
to be between the ball and the goals from 3 to 2. This gave immediate

impetus to the attacking game, and to counter it Herbert Chapman of
the Arsenal Team in England introduced the stopper center-halfback
system (Figure 15.4).

The stopper
center half

Figure 15.4

The formation using the stopper center half.

264

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The stopper center-halfback system soon led to the invention of the
formation, which reigned supreme for 30 years until Hungary
famous
formaintroduced the deep-lying center forward system in 1953. The
systems
and
is
still
a
good
system
tion was the forerunner of the modern
to use. It has an excellent balance between attack and defense, provides
for good support, maintains depth, and allows players to attack on a wider
front. The system is so named because players form a pattern that looks
and M (Figure 15.5).
like the letters

WM

WM

W

Figure 15.5

The WM system.

This system is a very effective attacking formation, especially if a team
has a powerful center forward or striker, two fast wingers, and clever
inside forwards and halfbacks. A team must also have a tall, commanding central defender and two mobile fullbacks.
If you play this system, don't let your two wingers become isolated
and just stand and watch. If the ball is not reaching them, they must be
prepared to leave their positions and look for the ball.

Team Formations and Systems of Play

265

Basic Components of Modern Systems
Modern systems are modified by the ability of the players, the style of
the coach, the strength of the opposition, and the state of the game. If
you are losing 0-1 with 2 minutes to go, you don't employ a defensive

system!
Fundamentally, however, all modern systems are based upon three
factors: the

dimensions of the field, the phases of the game (attack,

defense, and midfield play), and the strengths and weaknesses of the
players (Figure 15.6).

I

1

Defensive zone

Attacking zone

y

T

T

Figure 15.6

The field of play.

266

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The Field of Play
As 90% of goals are scored from inside the shooting zone, it follows that

we must both attack and defend these zones. We need players in the
middle of the field to link defense to attack, plus we must have a goalkeeper because the rules say so. Therefore, all modern systems, to achieve
a balance between attack and defense, involve seven players. Modern
systems include two attackers, two midfield players, two defenders, and
a goalkeeper.

The Three Phases of the Game

We must now consider how to position the remaining four players. We
do this by analyzing the three phases of the game: attack, midfield, and
defense. The remaining four players can be used to increase the effectiveness of any of the three phases, but you are always faced with a choice:
If you strengthen the defense by allocating extra players to it, then to
some extent your attack or your midfield must suffer. The differences are
best explained by analyzing the four most common modern systems of
play. Fundamentally, these systems are all based on the arrangement of
the seven players as shown in Figure 15.7.

Figure 15.7

A modern system achieves a balance between attack and defense by organizing the field with two attackers, two midfielders, two defenders, and a
goalkeeper.

Team Formations and Systems of Play

267

Four Modern Systems of Play
The modem systems are named by the formation in which the players
line up or are positioned across the field of play (usually but not always
at the start of the game).

Thus, for example, the 4:2:4 system has four

defenders, two midfield players, and four attackers. Similarly, the 4:3:3

system has four defenders, three midfield players, and three attackers.

Figure 15.8

The 4:3:3 formation.

The 4:3:3 Formation
This system, shown in Figure 15.8, keeps a strong defense and strengthens
the midfield by slightly reducing the attack. It is a well-balanced formation and is very popular. To use the 4:3:3 system you must teach your

two wing fullbacks how to overlap. For example, in Figure 15.9, the fullback makes a long, forward overlapping run to meet the ball coming from
the middle of the field.
You must also teach the three attackers how to work as a unit. For
example, if Player C in Figure 15.10 goes wide with the ball. Players A
and B make near- and far-post runs, respectively. Or, Player B might move
toward Player C to support.
Finally, you must send players forward (e.g., a center back to center
forward) toward the end of any game you are losing and at set plays.

268

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Figure 15.9
Fullbacks must overlap.

Team Formations and Systems of Play

269

The 4:2:4 Formation

Figure 15.11

The 4:2:4 formation.

The system shown in Figure 15.11 uses four attackers and four defenders.
Clearly, this gives good attack and good defense power but leaves a great
deal of work for the two midfield players. If you play this system you
must have two fit, clever midfield players on your team. You must teach
your wing forwards and wing fullbacks to support the midfield player
when the ball is on their side of the field (Figure 15.12).

Figure 15.12
Support the midfield when the ball is on your side.

270

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

You must also avoid the "squeezebox" problem, when attackers stay
up and defenders stay back, leaving the midfield players isolated and outnumbered (Figure 15.13).
Finally, you must not let the opposition dominate the midfield. If you
see this happening, you must change the system.

\

[

>;

]

y

Figure 15.13
Attackers and defenders must work hard to close the midfield gap.

The 3:3:4 Formation

Figure 15.14

The 3:3:4 formation.

Team Formations and Systems of Play

271

This system (Figure 15.14) keeps a strong attack by having two wingers

and a strong midfield at the expense of one defender. If you play on a
narrow field, this system may be very suitable. The system requires a
commanding center fullback, plus you must teach your wing forwards
to fall back in defense. Again, you must watch to see that the two wingers
do not become isolated.

The 4:4:2 System

>

Figure 15.15

The 4:4:2 formation.

With this system (Figure 15.15) you organize your players into a strong,
compact defense and midfield, and use two target players in attack.
Clearly, defense and midfield are very secure. This system is often used
by professional teams playing away from home and seeking a tie rather
than a win.
In attack, the system depends largely upon fast breakouts from defense.
You need two fast, highly mobile, and very fit strikers. Further, the midfield players must be prepared to move forward as a unit to support the
target players, and the outside halfbacks must be prepared to attack on

the wings.

272

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Variations of the Basic Systems

We now examine some of the most popular variations of the basic systems,
especially the sweeper system of defense and the target player system
of attack.

The Sweeper System of Defense
Some European teams play one defender behind a line of three or four
defenders. This defender is called the sweeper because he or she must
follow and support the defender who is tackling for the ball. (The other

defenders can stay close to their own attackers, and the defense is therefore tightly packed.) If you have a fast, tenacious tackier, this system may

your team, but remember it is a defensive system. Two popular
sweeper systems are shown in Figures 15.16a and b. In Figure 15.16a,
the sweeper plays behind three defenders. In Figure 15.16b, the sweeper plays behind four defenders.
suit

(Cont.)

Figure 15.16
The sweeper a) plays behind three defenders.

Team Formations and Systems of Play

273

Figure 15.16 (Continued)

The sweeper b) plays behind four defenders.

The Target Player
The target player is the player who must get as close as possible to the
opponent's goal without moving offside. The target player often stands
directly in front of the rearmost defender and by facing his own players
presents a target for them (Figure 15.17).
Because the target player stands in front of the rearmost defender (just
like postplay in basketball), he or she is obviously in a good strike posi-

tion. If the ball comes to the target player, it means that most defenders

have already been beaten and the attackers have achieved a 1 vs. 1 situation. If a player in such a position can turn with the ball and attack the
only remaining defender head to head, then clearly this is good attacking
play. It follows that the best tactical advice you can give your target player
is, "Turn if you can." If he or she cannot turn, and this is often the case
because the ball comes at a very fast pace, the target player should try
to "lay off" the ball to a supporting player (Figure 15.18).

274

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 15.17

A player stands in front of tfie rearmost defender and presents a target for
his or lier teammate to aim at.

ffc.:-^

Figure 15.18
Ttie target player lays off the ball behind the defense to a supporting player.

Team Formations and Systems of Play

275

The Counter to the Target Player
If

an attacking team uses the target player against your defense, your own

players must move forward quickly toward the opponent's goal just before the ball is played to the target player. In this way your defense can
either intercept the pass or play the target player offside.
If the ball reaches the target player,

your defender must do everything

possible to stop the turn, that is, to keep the attacker with his or her back
to the goal to prevent the shot.

Selecting a System
One of the most frequently asked questions is, "Which system should
use?" My answer is that only you can answer this question. Certainly
can write about which formations are available, but only you can see
how the strengths and weaknesses of individual players can be accommodated, and only you can modify your system to suit different game
situations. These are the key factors to have in mind when selecting a

I
1

system.

The second most frequent question is, "Where shall I play my least
able players?"
First,

notice that we talk about least able players, not weak or poor

players. Accommodating your least able players is an important coaching
strategy, particularly for American Youth Soccer Organization coaches,
for

whom everyone plays. The best answer is to go back to the seven

basic positions shown on p. 266. These are the key positions, and they
are therefore the positions that call for the highest involvement in the

game. You should deploy your most able players in these seven positions. Your least able players should then be placed in the four remaining
positions. This also clearly depends upon which system you select.
A word of caution: Don't try to make players fit into set positions until
they have tried to play several different positions. You should give your
players an opportunity to try different positions as part of their general
education.

Individual Duties and Responsibilities
As the success of any system depends upon the manner in which the
players make it work, each player must have specific roles and duties
to perform. This final section analyzes the fundamental duties that players

occupying each position should know and try to practice in the game.

276

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Listed are three basic rules that all players should observe, regardless of
their position or of the system.
•

When in the defensive zone, think of preventing a goal rather than

stealing the ball. Mistakes here can be costly,

and it is always better to

give away a throw-in or a corner rather than a goal.
•

When in the midfield, keep possession. Remember that when develop-

ing attacks, there are either fast or slow build-ups. If the opposition is
well-organized, you have to be patient and play the ball around; if they are

exposed, you have to be quick and direct. But above all, keep possession.
•

When in the attacking zone, be prepared to take risks; try to beat

the defender and to shoot whenever possible. You don't score unless you
shoot!

Responsibilities of Individual Positions

We can now consider the specific duties and responsibilities for each position. In the following sections, I identify important tactical strategies that
I

think each player should learn.

The Goalkeeper
After gathering the ball safely, the goalkeeper should think only of two
things: The goalkeeper should either look for a quick throw to an un-

marked colleague to gain an immediate advantage or wait until teammates
have moved forward and are ready to receive a long pass.
No matter where the opponents are building up their attack, the
goalkeeper should always stay in line with the ball and with the center
of his or her goal.

Rather than standing rigidly on the goal line, the goalkeeper should

move forward to the edge of the penalty area when the ball is in the opponents' half and should retreat slowly as the opponents attack.

Fullbacks
Fullbacks should try to intercept the ball before it reaches their winger.
If

the winger gets the ball first, the fullback must try to stop the cross

(prevent the winger from centering or crossing the ball into the goal area).
Fullbacks should always position themselves so that if the ball is kicked
over their heads or past them, they can always win the race to the ball
that is rolling toward their own goal.

is

When the attack is on the other side of the field, the fullbacks' first duty
to cover across. That means leaving their own wingers to cover the

middle of the field.

Team Formations and Systems of Play

277

Central Defenders
Central defenders must decide whether to play the sweeper or the pivot

system.

The defenders should always try to keep the attackers facing away from
the defenders' goal (i.e., stop the turn).
If the attacker is moving toward the defenders' goal, central defenders
should jockey so that their bodies stop the direct shot at goal and should

stay on their feet.

Midfield Players
Midfield players should not give square passes unless forced to, because

an interception exposes at least two players.
When the opposition has the ball, midfield players must run quickly
along their recovery line to get goalside of the ball.
Midfield players must learn when to support in front of the player with
the ball and when to support behind that player and keep running.

Wingers

A winger's first duty is to cross the ball.
Wingers should not shoot from the passing zone unless forced to.
When the attack is on the other wing, wingers should move into the
shooting zone.

Strikers
Strikers must go for the goal; they can't score unless they shoot at the goal.

Strikers must turn with the ball and attack the defenders whenever

possible.
Strikers must watch out for the offside trap and warn teammates of
this danger.

CHAPTER 16

Tactics at Corners
and Free Kicks
One of the hallmarks of a good coach is that his or her players know how
to organize themselves quickly and efficiently at free kicks and corner
kicks. In this chapter I discuss a series of moves and strategies for corners

and free kicks and explain ways in which these moves can be taught and
built up from basic principles. As many goals are scored directly as a result

of set plays, time spent coaching your players in these tactics wUl be well

spent.

The Short Corner
Every player should know how to use a short corner to restart the game
quickly and gain a tactical advantage. The short corner kick enables the
kicker to get much nearer to goal with a moving ball, which is much easier
to kick. This makes for a more dangerous cross when the ball is played,
especially on wet grounds. This kick draws defenders out of their defensive positions and frequently causes a general panic in the defense.

The Basic Move
The only way to take a short corner and not get caught offside is shown
in Figure 16.1. I describe this as the basic move, and I refer to it again
in some of the more advanced plays.
279

280

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 16.1
Taking a short corner using the basic move.

Player B must stand on the goal line about 6 yards from Player A. (This
ensures that Player A can never be caught offside.) Player A plays the
ball firmly to Player B after ensuring that the opponents are playing
according to the rules and standing at least 10 yards away.
Player B plays the ball gently back to Player A as shown, so that Player
A can take two or three strides and kick the moving ball into the goal
area. Both players have to practice to ensure that they pass accurately.
If players stand as shown in Figure 16.2, they may get caught offside.
The reason for this is that once Player A has played the ball to Player
B, then Player A is technically standing in an offside position (i.e., in front
of the player with the ball).

Figure 16.2
Improper set-up in the short corner.

Tactics at Corners and Free Kicks

281

Short Corner Variations
Many variations can be played at a short comer. Two very effective moves
involve a third player who moves up from a deep-lying situation to cross
the ball. This player can be brought into play by an extension of the basic

move, in that instead of crossing the ball the kicker plays the ball back
to the deep supporting player who crosses the ball from a different angle.

Or the third player can be brought into play when the kicker ignores the
basic move and plays the ball directly back to the support player (after

the fullback has moved forward unnoticed) (Figures 16.3 and 16.4).

Figure 16.3
Variation

1

on the short corner kick.

Figure 16.4
Variation 2 on the short corner kick.

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

282

In Figure 16.3, Player B comes from the near post; Player A plays the

who moves from a deep position to center
the ball. In Figure 16.4, Player B comes from the near post, but Player
ball into the path of Player C,

A kicks the ball to Player C to center.
Another very effective move is played when the player who always
supports the kicker for the basic move comes to the corner to prepare
for the kick but is then sent back by the kicker who pretends to elect to
take a long corner. As the decoy player turns his or her back on the kicker
and begins to walk along the goal line back toward the goal, the kicker
rolls the ball forward along the goal line for the decoy player to use. This
move has the advantage of getting a player with the ball into the penalty
area at a position ideal for a pass back to an incoming shooter.

The Long Corner
Only your very best kickers should be allowed to take the long corners.
Hold elimination competitions during practice to select those who can
kick the ball into the goal area consistently well. Ideally, you want at least
one specialist from each side of the field because inswing corner kicks,
in which the ball spins dangerously toward the goal, are always more
effective than outswing corner kicks, in which the ball spins away from
the goal and is usually less dangerous (Figure 16.5). This means that you
must cultivate a left-footed kicker to take comer kicks from the right-hand
side of the field and vice versa (Figure 16.6).
^

t

^

I

•-

••..

\

..•

Figure 16.5

The inswing and outswing long corner kick.

r

Tactics at Corners and Free Kicks

.<

283

.
• • • •

•••••••
Figure 16.6

Right-footed players take the corner to get an inswing from the left side of
the field. Left-footed players take the corner to get an inswing from the right

side of the field.

Attack at Long Comers
Use seven attacking players (plus one kicker) and teach them to make
the formation shown in Figure 16.7. With younger players, each player
can have a landmark to stand on. These landmarks are carefully detailed
and should be memorized by the players.

Figure 16.7
Attacking positions at corners.

284

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The Landmarks
Take your players to the exact spot on which you want them to stand
and give them the following directions.
Player A is just in front of the goalpost nearest the kicker.
Player B is just in front of the goalkeeper (but must not touch or try
to interfere with the goalkeeper).

Player C is at the corner of the 6-yard area nearest the kicker.
Players D and E are in line with the penalty spot opposite to the left

and right goalposts, respectively.
Player F is at the corner of the 6-yard area furthest from the kicker but

moves in as the kick is taken.
Player G is on the penalty area line opposite the 6-yard line nearest
the kicker.
In this formation, players can attack the goal and the shaded area, take
advantage of any rebounds or knockdowns, collect any semicleared
corners, and get possession of any corner kick that a teammate kicks inaccurately. The kicker. Player H, should run directly back toward his or
her own half of the field regardless of the accuracy of the kick. Many inexperienced players simply stand and watch what happens! Tell your
kicker to kick and run back. Players 1 and J stay back as shown to defend

against a fast break.

Tactical Variations for Long Corners
Tactical variations at long corners are of two types: near-post plays (in

which the target area is the goalpost nearest the kicker) and far-post plays
(in which the target area is the goalpost furthest from the kicker).
Near-Post Plays
Near-post plays have two main variations. The target player, who is positioned in or moves into the near-post area (Player A in Figure 16.8), either
tries a direct strike on goal, usually by heading the ball, or back-heads
the ball into the area in front of goal, hopefully into the path of the three
converging attackers or to the player in front of the goalkeeper or any
attacker who positions in front of the goalkeeper. In Figure 16.9, Player

A heads directly into the goal or tries to flick the ball toward Players B,
C, or D.

Far-Post Plays

Here the kicker aims to land the ball in the area at the far side of the goal.
Ideally this target area is outside the reach of the goalkeeper (at least 6

yards from the goal) but close enough to the goal to enable an incoming

Tactics at Corners and Free Kicks

285

player to achieve a direct strike on goal, usually by heading the ball. A
target landing area 8 to 10 yards from the goal line is ideal. In Figure 16.9,

Player A runs forward to draw opponents to the near post, but the corner
is

played long for other forwards coming in.

Figure 16.8
Player A runs forward to draw opponents to the near post, but the corner is
played long for other forwards coming in.

Figure 16.9
Player A heads the ball directly into the goal or tries to flick the ball to the far

post for players B, C, or D coming in.

Give a Signal
Attackers can confuse defenders by making decoy runs and executing
tactics from either the long or the short corner moves.

Such moves, of

course, must be rehearsed and signaled for maximum benefit. All players

must understand that only the player taking the kick can signal the move.

286

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The Same Starting Move
The reader may have noticed that one player (Player A in Figures 16.8
and 16.9) makes the same starting move regardless of whether it is a nearpost or a far-post move. This kind of consistency is an important advantage to your team, as players gain confidence by rehearsing and executing
tactical moves.

Defense at Corners
Professional teams normally use a combination of two defensive systems,

which cover both the danger areas (zone marking) and the danger players
individually (one-on-one). For younger players, this is too complicated.
A simpler method involves assigning each player a zone with instructions
to be the first to the ball if it comes into that zone.

Organization
Figure 16.10 shows the organization of eight players plus one goalkeeper.

During critical moments in the game (e.g., you are winning 1-0 with a
minute to play), bring all 11 players back into defense. Note that Players
I and J, the two forwards, should stay upfield in wide positions and try
to attract at least three defenders by moving about.

Figure 16.10
Defensive positions at corners.

Tactics at Corners and Free Kicks

287

Landmarks
Again, place your players on the exact spot, and then give thenn their
landmarks.
The goalkeeper is in the center of the goal line, facing at a 45° angle
to the field.

Player A is on the goal line behind the goalkeeper.
Player B is just outside and just ahead of the post nearest the kicker.
Player C is 10 yards from the kicker and in line with the intended line
of the kick.

Player D is in the middle of the 6-yard line.

Player E is on the 6-yard line opposite the near post.
Player F is on the 6-yard line opposite the far post.
Player G is on the penalty spot.
Player

H is in the corner of the penalty area. This player is also in the

best position to break away because most corners are defended on the

same side.
Players I and J remain upfield unless needed in a crisis situation.

The Perfect Clearance
Encourage your defenders to clear the ball away for height, width, and
distance.

Height gains time, width gets the ball away from the shooting zone,
and distance relieves the pressure. The perfect clearance from a corner
kick has height, width, and distance and reaches one of your own players!

The Attacking Free Kick
One of the most effective of all the free kicks at goal is the direct shot,
especially the curved or swerved shot, which can bend around the defensive wall. The second most effective play is one that involves two players.
Three or more players who combine in a rehearsed move must spend
a great deal of time in practice. Such moves are difficult for young players
to

master and are not recommended.

One-Player Moves
The most effective and spectacular move at a direct free kick involves your
best kicker taking a direct shot (often a swerved or banana kick) at goal.
Such moves improve if other players make decoy runs, but these moves
basically depend upon your kicker, who must practice.

288

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The Direct or Swerve Shot

We have already covered the technique of swerving the ball (p. 162). Select
your best two or three players and let them practice shooting around a wall

made up of two corner posts and a piece of string positioned at different
places in the penalty area. Use a kicking tee at first to encourage the
swerve shot (Figure 16.11). In Figure 16.11, players swerve the ball around

the wall aiming for the top corners of the goal.

Figure 16.11

A safe way to practice the swerve shot at goals is to shoot from different
positions.

Two-Player Moves

A player can either play the ball over the wall or around

it.

With two-

player moves, the kicker passes the ball sideways for a colleague to shoot,
or the kicker lofts the ball over the wall for other attackers to head or shoot
at goal.

Passing the Ball Sideways
Several moves can be successful when the ball is simply played sideways
to open up a space at the side of the wall through which the ball can be

Tactics at Corners and Free Kicks

289

aimed. The kicker can play the ball either way, left or right, but it is usually
better to play the ball toward the center of the goal because this improves

the size of the target (the goal).

Again the kicker must signal his intention in some way, and the designated shooter should always allow at least 5 yards to move forward to
make the shot. Younger players usually need this amount of space to prepare (balance) themselves for the instep drive.
In a useful variation of the sideways pass, two players face each other,
feet wide apart. From this position, either player can play the ball sideways through the legs of the other. In Figure 16.12, Players A and B are
on the ball, facing each other. Player A plays the ball through the legs
of Player B for Player C to shoot. Note that Player C remains at least 5
yards behind the point at which the ball is actually kicked so that he or
she can balance and time the approach run to the ball. For this reason
the players concerned must practice. Note that the pass is made toward
the center of the goal.

Figure 16.12

A variation of the sideways pass.

Crossing the Ball
This is a very simple but dangerous alternative move at a set free kick.
It is like a corner kick and can be played to the near or far post (usually
the far-post area). The kicker simply lofts the ball over the defensive line
into the path of designated attackers converging on goal. In Figure 16.13,

290

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Player A plays the ball long over the wall to the near post so Player B
can head for goal. This is a simple move but must be practiced to ensure
that Player B times the run correctly.

Figure 16.13

A technique for crossing the ball at a set free kick.

Tactical Variations at Free Kicks

*

Free kicks have many effective variations, and every good coach will enjoy
creating his or her own moves. Among the standard moves are those that

involve putting one of your own players into or at the end of the defensive
wall; at the last moment that player moves out and away from the wall,

leaving a space through which the shooter aims. Such a tactic is unlikely
to be effective against a well-organized defense, however, because players
will simply re-form behind the player.

The attacker-in-the-wall theme has two effective variations. The attacker
in the defensive wall can move forward to the kicker and play the ball

sideways for the shooter, or that player can turn behind the wall and shoot
a chipped pass over the wall.
In Figure 16.14, Player A stands in the wall. As Player B kicks. Player
A moves forward and passes to Player C, who shoots. In Figure 16.15,
Player B stands in the wall. As Player A chips. Player B turns, collects
the chip, and shoots.

Tactics at Corners and Free Kicks

Figure 16.14
Variation

1

of the attacker in the wall.

Figure 16.15
Variation 2 of the attacker in the wall.

291

292

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Ignoring the Wall

A very effective alternative is to ignore the wall altogether and simply
get one of your players to the goal line, from which position a shot, or

more likely a cross, can be made. In Figure 16.16, Player A runs behind
the wall, making sure he or she is not offside, in order to take Player X
out of position. Player B runs from the rear into the space behind the
He or she can now shoot or cross the ball.

wall.

Figure 16.16
In Variation 3 the attacker ignores the wall.

Playing the Ball Behind the Wall

Figure 16.17
In Variation 4 the attackers play the ball behind the wall.

I

Tactics at Corners and Free Kicks

293

In this move, as shown in Figure 16.17, Player B positions behind and
to the side of the wall. Player

A plays the ball to Player B so Player B

can play the ball behind the line to Player C, who runs from a deep position to shoot. Note that in this move. Player A has to play the ball to
Player B's left foot so that Player B can make an accurate, flowing pass.
If the move is on the other side of the penalty area, the pass is made by
Player B's right foot.

Defense of Free Kicks
All 10 outfield players must be prepared to defend at free kicks, either
by joining the defensive wall or by occupying key positions around it.
The first decision— how many players in the wall— should be made by

the goalkeeper according to the position of the kick.
The number of players is determined by the position of the ball (Figure

you need two players because of the acute angle. In
Area 3, you need three players. (In extreme cases of an indirect free kick

16.18). In Area 2,

inside the goal area,

all

10 players would be positioned in the wall.)

—

I

o
o

/

X

/

/

/

/

/

/

A

2

^

\

/

Area two

o

\

\

/000060000 \ Area three

r^^7. Area four

/

/
/

\

Area five
'

4

\

\

3

^

^

\

Figure 16.18

The number of players needed in the defensive wall is determined by the
area of the field where the ball is.

294

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Making a Wall

Figure 16.19

The key player in this wall is the one to the far left.

The key player in the wall is the one who has the goalpost directly behind
his or her head (Figure 16.19). When players are in this position, the
goalkeeper can cover the remaining half of the goal because few junior
players can swerve the ball around the key player. However, if you think
that the opposition does have such a player, position your defenders so
that the post is directly behind the head of the second player (Figure
16.20). This makes the wall very safe from the outside curve, but increases
the risk of an inside curve shot.

Figure 16.20
This set-up helps defend the goal from the outside curve.

How to Stand on the Wall
Boys can stand facing the kick with their hands held in front. Girls should
stand sideways to the kick, looking over their shoulders at the ball. The

end girl faces the opposite way that the rest are facing (Figure 16.21).

Tactics at Corners and Free Kicks

295

Figure 16.21
Girls should stand sideways to the kick for protection.

Positioning Around the Wall
The players who are left after the wall has been formed must be positioned to stop or reduce the success of the opposition's attacking moves.
In particular, the remaining players must cover the area into which a sideways pass might penetrate and the area into which a lofted kick might

be directed.
Figure 16.22 shows a typical way defending players might be positioned
against a free kick requiring four players in the wall. Players A, B, C, and

D are the wall. Players E and F stop the side pass; Players G, H, and
I

stop the high cross; and Player J stops the wing move.

Figure 16.22

A typical defense at free kicks.

296

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The Goalkeeper
Having decided on the size of the wall, the goalkeeper should not control

how it is positioned. This role must be undertaken by a nominated outfield player so the goalkeeper can watch for a quickly taken kick or shot
at goal.

The goalkeeper's position on the goal line is determined by two priorities: The goalkeeper must be able to see the ball and must be on the most

vulnerable side, which is the one not covered by the wall. However, the

goalkeeper must not stand too far from the center of the goal line because
of the danger of the swerve shot. The best compromise is to stand where
the ball can be seen and as near to the center of the goal line as possible.

Coaching Set Plays
Because of their importance, tactical moves from corners, throw-ins, and
free kicks have to be rehearsed many times, as during the heat of the
moment even experienced players can forget or ignore what they have
practiced.
First, you should appoint a player to mastermind your set plays and
advise the other players which move is to be attempted. You will have

more than one player capable of fulfilling this role, and you may have
different players for different plays.

Second, you must set aside practice time for coaching and rehearsing
Because set plays usually involve small numbers of players,
you can often work with just these units so the players not involved in
the play won't be inactive while the others practice. If you have an assisset plays.

tant coach, divide the team into attacking and defensive units for practice and then bring the two together in attack versus defense situations

directed toward creating set play situations.

Third, have a simple playbook that contains the moves you have practiced and identifies players' roles. These plays can be revised during chalk-

and-talk sessions and studied by the players on their own time.

One of the hallmarks of a good coach is that his or her players know
exactly how to organize themselves for set plays and how to use these

plays successfully in games. Set plays represent the only point in the game

when you have possession of the ball, the opposition must allow you
10 yards of space to execute your move, and they do not know what to
expect. You must take advantage of these conditions by being well
prepared.

CHAPTER 17

298

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Where Do I Coach?
Always set up your coaching practice in the area of the field where such
play normally takes place (e.g., coach the goalkeeper in the goal, the
winger on the wing).

You must always be on the field of play yourself, close to the center
of action but never inside it where you will only get in the way of the
players.

How Do I Coach?
have found five methods most helpful: game conditioning, silent soccer,
advance calling, the playback system, and videotaping.
I

Game Conditioning
The first method, game conditioning, can improve teamwork. For example, if you are unhappy about the way your players ran to support
each other in their last game, you might play two-touch soccer. If your
defenders watch where the ball goes rather than where their opponent
goes, you might play one-on-one marking. You can also invent special
rules. For example, blowing the whistle twice in succession might mean

that the team in possession has given away an indirect free kick against

themselves. You can now watch to see how quickly players react at the
breakdown point when the ball changes hands. Similarly, three quick
blasts on the whistle might indicate a direct free kick. You can now see

how well your players form a defensive wall or use a rehearsed set play.

Silent Soccer

One of the best conditioned games to encourage good team play is silent
soccer. In this game, no player is allowed to call out or even whisper for

any reason. The penalty for doing so is a direct free kick. Players quickly
realize that they have to think and act entirely for themselves. Because
no one tells them what to do or how to play, their actions are entirely
the result of their own thoughts. You can see what they are thinking.
Further, because the players are quiet, it is much easier to communicate
with them, and you won't finish the practice with a headache or a sore
throat!

Coaching Tactics and Teamwork— Methods

299

Use silent soccer for limited periods, and hear and see the difference.
This is a boon for coaches of the noisy young, and it is much enjoyed
by the more sensitive players who for once are not continually shouted
at by teammates. Silent soccer is a thinking and acting game— the essence
of good soccer.

Advance Calling
With this method the coach thinks ahead for the players, for example,
"Kelly, make a through pass to Chris." Because the coach is not actually
playing, he or she can more easily think ahead; by talking to the players,

the coach can help them develop tactical appreciation.

This method keeps the game flowing, and the players learn while playing. It is most important when introducing new players to plays, especially set plays

such as free kicks.

The Playback System
This method is the most important of all coaching methods. Here you
reconstruct or play back what has happened so that you can demonstrate

not only what happened but why. Further, you can then show players

what should have happened, which is always the most effective way of
communicating good tactical play.
This method has six stages:

Arrange and start the practice.
Watch and wait.
• Stop the practice and move to the focal point.

•

•

•
•

Rearrange the players.
Replay the move correctly.

• Restart play.

Stage 1—Arrange and Start the Practice
Imagine that you play a 4:2:4 system and that you want to coach the four
defenders, who did not cover each other very well in the previous game.
In this case, you would choose an attack versus defense practice (p. 305)
and position yourself behind and to the side of the defenders (Figure 17.1).
To get a realistic start you might kick the ball forward over the heads of
your defenders to one of the attacking players.

300

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

•A
•

•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

C

Coaching Tactics and Teamwork— Methods

301

Stages 3— Stop the Practice and Move to the Focal Point
Stop the play by using a clear command like "freeze" or "stop" rather
than with your whistle. Then move quickly to the key player, the one
who you want to coach or use as your example (Player Y in Figure 17.3).

Figure 17.3
Stage 3— Coach moves to the focal point.

Stage 4— Rearrange the Players
Stand by the key player and rearrange the other players into the positions they held at the start of the play. Make sure that everyone can see

and hear you.
Stage 5— Replay the Move Correctly
Replay the move to show and explain to the players what happened and
what should have happened.
Don't talk too much; if you can, use the question-and-answer technique
(chapter 2) to increase player participation. You now replay the move

showing the players what should have happened (Figure 17.4).
Show Player Y the correct move, restating the rule, "Nearest defender
goes to meet the ball."
Be sure Players
and X also know how they should react.

W

Stage 6— Restart Play
Put everyone back into their original positions, tell Player F to pass to
Player E, and shout "play on." The defenders should now react correctly.

302

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 17.4
Stage 5— Defenders react correctly.

Move away to the side and watch for the next point.
If possible, restart the game with the correct move. It is not always
possible, but it does reinforce what you have just explained. The game

now continues until you are ready to make your next coaching point.

Videotaping
Videotaping is becoming increasingly popular at all levels of soccer and
is particularly valuable for analyzing set plays. It is also very useful for
concentrating on individual players, especially the goalkeeper.
I spent two weeks during a world hockey championship in Pakistan
recording the moves of selected individual players in order to quantify

work rate and design game-related fitness training programs. If you have
time or know a friendly parent who can help, why not try something
like this yourself? I can offer you some suggestions about filming tech-

niques and the best way to show tapes to players.

Filming Techniques

With hand-held cameras it is very difficult to film wide-angle shots that
will make good viewing. Unless you can position yourself high above
play, wide-angle shots to capture technical moves are unlikely to be helpful to players. For these reasons, hand-held video cameras are best used

Coaching Tactics and Teamwork— Methods

303

in small areas of play. For example, you can videotape the goal area effectively, focus on set moves, and film throw-ins and short corners. You
can also, as I did in Pakistan, focus on individual players at least for limited
periods of the game. If you do this, however, don't stop your camera
when the game stops. Keep the film running, because how a player moves
into position while the game is stopped might be significant.
If you have access to a high flat roof or window in an adjacent building
and use a tripod, then you can make very good tapes. Alternatively, and
only if the authorities allow it, you can get quite good wide-angle shots
from a tripod positioned on top of a truck. Much depends upon your
local circumstances.

Showing and Using Your Videotape
Having made your tapes, beware! You are now entering what is potentially the greatest time-wasting aspect of coaching. Let me offer some
lessons I have learned over the years.
•
•

Never show an unedited tape to your players.
Having selected the key passages you want to show, prepare your
comments either by using a voice-over on the tape itself or by preparing notes.

•

Discuss key points or plays as they occur. Don't run the tape through

and then ask players to remember or recall events— comment during
or immediately after the events.

Don't allow videotapes to replace your regular field practice. If you
have some valuable material, use it to supplement your field coaching. Ideally, have your players arrive early, and show the film before
your practice sessions. In this way you will have a wealth of visual
references to reinforce your field practices.
• Don't let the length of the tape dictate the length of your viewing
session; be very selective and limit your viewing time to effective

•

material.
•

Let your players have copies of the edited tape to take home and

watch during their leisure time.

Remember that video tapes are very useful coaching devices. However,
you must use them correctly for your players to get the maximum benefit.

CHAPTER 18

306

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Figure 18.1 shows how to organize your players. Defenders play their
normal positions, and forwards attack them. Midfield players can be used
in defense or attack, depending upon the theme of your practice.

•

•

Practice Situations

field;

307

or run hard to get goalside of the ball if the first two tactics don't

work.
Defenders: Try to win possession. Then, play the ball directly to a target
player (often the coach, who can then start the next practice); play the
ball to the goalkeeper and move out as in a game; interpass and play the
ball forward; or in an emergency, clear your lines by playing the ball up-

field or over the sideline or even by giving away a corner.

Coaching Progressions
You can develop this practice in four ways.
1.

2.

Coach a theme (e.g., accuracy of passing or good support play).
Select a small group of players (e.g., the back four defenders, the
midfield players, or the strikers), and coach them as a unit. This
is the most common way of using the practice and might include,
for example, showing the defenders how to cover or showing the
forwards and midfield players how to combine in a target player
drill.

3.

Select an individual player for special coaching.

Here you work

closely with one player and by giving quiet instructions and advice

help him or her to develop tactical awareness. In essence, you see
the game through the eyes of the player and try to make decisions

4.

with and for that player. Done well, this is a rewarding practice
and a great confidence builder.
Referee the game, observe what is happening, but say nothing.
After a period of time, call the players in to discuss what you have
seen.

Shadow Soccer
This practice gets its name from the fact that you start by playing your
full team against an imaginary team. This is one of the best ways of teach-

ing players how to combine as a team. Furthermore, when you introduce
defenders, it becomes a very realistic and physically demanding practice.

once watched the Belgian professional team, Liege, complete a 1-hour,
nonstop game of shadow soccer, and it was a most impressive workout.
Every attack finished with a strike at goal, and both keepers were very
(I

active.)

308

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Organization
The practice takes place on a full-size field. Arrange 10 players in their
regular team positions with a goalkeeper at each end (Figure 18.2).
One goalkeeper starts the practice with a pass to a defender. The team
then builds an attack just as if in a game, finishing with a shot from outside the penalty area or a header at goal from a cross.

Figure 18.2
Starting to practice shadow soccer.

Immediately after the attack is completed, the practice reverses. For-

wards become defenders, defenders become attackers, and midfield
players stay where they are; the team now attacks the other goal. This
is a popular change for the defenders, who rarely get the opportunity
to

demonstrate their attacking skills.

Coactiing Progressions
Once the players understand the idea of practice without opposition,
introduce up to four defenders, positioned as shown in Figure 18.3. Ini-

Practice Situations

tially,

309

these players must remain in the third of the field in which they

are placed, although later they are not restricted.

As the practice develops, allow the defenders to move into an adjacent
now be faced with two and possibly three

zone. The attackers will

defenders in each zone. Finally, allow your defenders to tackle anywhere.

Every time the defenders spoil an attack it counts as a goal for them.
Because defending is very exhausting, this last condition is a great
motivator.

Figure 18.3
Introducing opposition.

Positional Practices for Individuals
Positional practices help individual players learn more about the tactics
of their regular position. Occasionally you can coach two players together
(e.g., central defenders or twin strikers), but mostly you are concerned
with a single player. You must remember two main points.
First, to coach an individual player to improve tactical awareness or
develop a particular skill, you should develop the chosen activity in stages.
In this way you can introduce the player to the activity in simple, straightforward steps that allow you to make your coaching points and at the

310

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

same time encourage the player to develop confidence. For example, you
can start by working with the individual player and gradually introduce
defending and attacking players. As the players improve, you can then
move into set plays, attack versus defense situations, or even a full game.
Second, remember that the most important factor is that the player
makes or tries to make the right decisions. Good execution is important,
but of greater concern at this time are the player's thought processes.
The following example shows how positional practices are developed
through a series of progressions.

Coaching the Target Player in Attacl<
Imagine that your center forward or one of your strikers never seems to
play well when receiving a pass with his or her back toward the opponents' goal. For example, the player is reluctant to try to control the ball,
turn with it, attack the defense, and shoot for goal. The following discussion demonstrates how a progressive practice could be developed to help
this player; remember that this method is applicable to any position or

player.

Stage 1
Position the player

on the part of the field that is most realistic for

practice— in our case the D area outside the penalty area, with the player's

back toward goal. Have a supporting player stand 10 to 15 yards away
and feed in a number of realistic passes for the target player to bring under
control (Figure 18.4).

Stage 2
Encourage the target player to not only control the ball but to turn with
it, look at the goal, and shoot. The shot should be released from just inside
or on the edge of the penalty area. During these practices you can check
on the techniques that the target player uses for controlling, turning, and
shooting, and you can begin to implant the sequence of events in the
player's mind. At this stage you might also ask the server to play the
ball in at different heights and speeds, thus posing additional control
factors for the target player. Remember to encourage a shot at goal.

Stage 3
At this stage, introduce additional players and begin to increase the
realism of the practice (Figure 18.5).
First

introduce a defender positioned immediately behind the target

player, as in a real game. This defender might initially be passive but

Practice Situations

311

Figure 18.4

The first step in coactiing the target player in attacl< is to recreate the starting
position.

•

^•m

Figure 18.5
Introduce the opposition.

312

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

increasingly becomes more and more active, thus presenting a realistic
challenge. If the target player can control the ball, turn, and release a shot
on goal under these conditions, he or she is doing quite well.

Stage 4
Next, introduce a second attacking player, which will present the target
player with an alternative strategy. The target player can now screen the
ball from the defender and pass to the supporting player,

who shoots

for goal. Providing an alternative to the target player creates a decision-

making situation similar to that experienced in the game. The player
should by now have developed the confidence to either beat the defender
or screen the ball and then pass it to the supporting attacker. Indeed,
if the target player is prepared to screen, take a pass, and then try again
to turn and beat the defender, then he or she is playing very well.
Stage 5

Now make the practice more realistic and more complicated by introducing a second defender and a third attacker (Figure 18.6). Immediately the

number of alternatives for the target player increases. Encourage the target
player to make his or her own decisions. Coach as necessary, but let the
player think independently. The server starts the practice by playing the
ball to the target player.

•

.••

Figure 18.6
Increase realism.

Practice Situations

313

Stage 6

The final stage is to play attack versus defense (chapter 18) or to play a
full game and coach the target player during the game. In either case,
you ease the player back into the game situation, but he or she is now
more knowledgeable about what to do and how to do it.

Good Decision l^aicing
You will observe four kinds of decision-making situations when you are
coaching, each of which requires a different coaching strategy. The four
situations are
• correct

decision-successful execution,

•

correct decision-unsuccessful execution,

•

incorrect decision-successful execution,

• incorrect

and

decision-unsuccessful execution.

These alternatives are arranged in Table 18.1, which offers appropriate
coaching strategies.

Table 18.1

Decision Making

Decision

Correct decision

Execution

Your reaction

Reason

Successful exe-

"Great. Good

This is a double

cution

decision and

positive

good execution-

situation—

well done."

everyone wins.

Now make the
task a little

harder!

Correct decision

Unsuccessful
execution

"Good try. You
made the right

Reinforce the
fact that the

decision was cor-

and
this is what

rect.

matters."

practice until the

decision,

Repeat the

execution
improves.

(Cont.)

314

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Table 18.1

(Continued)

Decision

PART IV

TEAM MANAGEMENT
In Part IV, I present my ideas on team management. I explain the activities
I

use to prepare my teams for competitive games, my approach to mental

preparation and tactics talks, my methods for handling difficult players
(including the problem of dropping a player), and the activities I recom-

mend for fitness training.

315

CHAPTER 19

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

318

Initial

Warm-Up

Many people start their warm-up by stretching; this is wrong. Muscles
respond best when they are warm, so the correct way to start a warm-up
is with general

body exercises that increase the heart rate and the breath-

ing rate. For safety, these general body movements must also be low

impact activities, that is, they must not expose the muscles to violent or

sudden stretching to the full extent of their range.
Ideal starting exercises include running in place or skipping; the best
practice is to gently run backward and forward across the field six times.

The first two runs should be gentle and loose, the movements free and
relaxed. The third and fourth runs can include sideways and backward
movements. The final two runs should be at increased tempo and should
consist of four phases— jog, stride, accelerate, and slow down— each phase
covering about 15 yards. In cold or inclement weather, players should

wear warm-up suits.
After the starting exercise, players are ready to begin progressive stretching.

The stretches must concentrate on the front, back, insides of the

thighs, and on the spine. Goalkeepers must also include gently rolling

and springing movements as well as shoulder mobility exercises. All
stretches should be static stretches, that is, the muscle should be gently

extended into a stretch position and held for 10 seconds. Don't let your
players bounce up and down using ballistic movements, as such actions
are dangerous. When static stretching is over, the players should then

move into ball drills.

WARM-UP SEQUENCE FOR SOCCER
Engage in running activities as described previously.
Stand, hold ankle, and stretch the thigh backwards; alternate legs (Figure
19.1).

Figure 19.1

Physical and Mental Preparation

319

Cross feet. Static stretch the hamstrings by letting the body and arms hang
down. Do not bounce up and down. Change feet and repeat (Figure 19.2).

Figure 19.2

Shake and loosen arms and legs.

Open groin muscles (adductors) by stretching the inside of the legs gently (Figure 19.3).

Figure 19.3

Raise knee and turn leg 90° sideways. This opens the groin in a second
direction or plane. Place hand on the raised knee for balance (Figure 19.4).

Figure 19.4

320

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Shake and loosen arms and legs.
Stretch arms above head. Bend slowly backward as if preparing to throw

the ball. Gently simulate the throwing action a few times (Figure 19.5).

Figure 19.5

Finish with a 5-second run in place or short sprints across the field, then

move into ball skills preparation.
Note: A stretching session is an ideal time for final tactics talks and mental
preparation.

Ball Skills Preparation
All players need time to prepare their ball skills before the game. I al-

ways advise that they carry out a prearranged series of activities in small
groups (Figure 19.6). Some examples follow.

Goalkeeper.

The substitutes prepare the goalkeeper by volleying balls

to him or her from short range. This gives the goalkeeper the feel of the
ball. The substitutes should then play a variety of balls from just inside

the penalty area to give their goalkeeper practice at dealing with shots

and crosses from both wings. Younger players should kick crosses from
their hands to get height and accuracy. If the sun is out, the goalkeeper
should practice while facing the sun to get used to this condition.
The defenders work together in pairs (e.g., two fullbacks
and two center backs). They should practice dealing with high dropping
balls and, like the goalkeeper, must practice against weather elements
like the sun and wind. They must also practice long kicking, quick turning,
and defensive heading.
Defenders.

These players practice in their own group, using lots
of short passing for accuracy. They must get the feel of the ball on the
Midfield Players.

surface. Older players should practice chipping the ball, dribbling, and

turning.

Physical and Mental Preparation

321

322

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

clear the muscles. The ideal activities are the running and stretching activities you gave to the players before the game. This should be moderate
work starting with jogging and strides and gradually slowing to stretches.
You will find that the only way to get a good cooling down session is

to conduct it yourself.

Mental Preparation
In sports, mental preparation is just as important as physical preparation.

Coaches need to carefully prepare athletes mentally for competition. Poor
mental readiness can be more detrimental to performance than poor physical readiness.

Pregame Talks
Overly dramatic talks in the locker room can be counterproductive. A well-

known psychological law— the Yerkes Dodson Law— says that when
performing skillful activities players have an optimum level of arousal
or excitement. If you try to motivate some players too much, especially
introverts, you can actually reduce their performance of skillful tasks because they become too emotional and excited. For example, you might

make a sensitive goalkeeper too anxious to catch the ball properly or make
a young center forward unable to stay composed in the penalty area. Even
an experienced player can have these problems, and you don't want to
contribute to them.

To make players competitive, you have to get your psychology right.
This means recognizing that any team contains a mixture of personalities.

You must handle players individually and be careful when using prematch
talks to psych up the whole team at the same time. Young players often
need calming down more than psyching up. Emotions such as frustraanger, fear, and jealousy usually interfere with performance.
Successful players are competitive but not overanxious. They can retain

tion,

their composure and stay cool under pressure. The strategies 1 use to try
to achieve and sustain this ideal are as follows.

The Positive Approach

When

I give pregame tactics talks I always try to use positive reinforcement. 1 continually reinforce the good, rather than the bad, by referring

to movements, styles, or skills that have been successful. I do this so
players will form mental images of the good plays they have made in

Physical and Mental Preparation

323

the past. The structure of the following examples demonstrates the
technique:

"Sven [the goalkeeper], remember that quick throw to Mike last game?
That was great— try for the same thing today."
"Mike [a forward], remember last week how you avoided getting caught
offside by looking both ways? Try to do the same again today."
"Kai [a winger], when you centered that ball the other week from the
goal line you got the defense in all kinds of trouble because they were
caught facing the wrong way. Keep looking for chances to get to the goal
line before you center the ball."

"Tania [a midfield player], that through pass inside the fullback against
Simi was magic— try for the same today."
In all these examples, I remind the player of a successful play. In this
way I hope to achieve a double positive effect: I make the tactical point
(i.e.,

1

achieve a knowledge or learning input), and I create in the player's

mind a good mental image that should be reassuring and build up his
or her confidence.

Let me now make an additional point about the importance of giving
relevant messages to the players.

High Information l\/lessages
Note that the previous examples are very high in what psychologists call
information, that is, factual knowledge that helps the player identify what
kind of behavior is expected from him or her in the coming game. In
pregame talks I avoid making emotional appeals to players to try hard
or do their best. Trying hard and doing one's best should be taken for
granted; players need information about their own play, about how they
should work as a team, and about what to remember about opposing
players. Please review the examples in the previous section before you
continue to my third recommendation about pregame talks.

Use of ttie Voice

You can achieve much by controlling the speaking voice you use when
you address your players. I believe that you can focus the attention of
the players on important issues by adopting a quiet, calm, even conversational tone of voice. Certainly a calm, confident voice reduces tension

and anxiety and can help to steady young nerves. My advice is to talk,
not shout.
Soccer involves a high degree of skill, and excessive states of arousal
are more likely to diminish performance than improve it. Also, infrequent

use of a loud voice means it has more effect when it is used; save your
loud voice for emergencies.

324

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Keep It Short
Pregame speeches for young players should last no longer than 5 minutes.
Young players have short attention spans, and a tactics talk to which no
one listens is of no value! A pregame talk should be a summary of what
you have covered in practice and what you want players to concentrate
on during the game. A pregame talk should not be a lecture about material
you should have covered in practice.

Coaching During Play
Coaching during play is illegal, and the referee should caution excessive
shouting by any coach. If you want to encourage your team during play,
simply move around the side of the field giving quiet, calm encouragement where it is needed. Never use sarcasm or be overtly critical, and
don't shout or scream, as this degrades both you and the players. Above
all, try to immediately encourage any player who makes a serious error.

Halftime Talks
Halftime provides an important opportunity to help your team, so be
prepared. Players will listen to and be able to act upon very few instruc-

For this reason, I advise you to limit the key points you want to
emphasize to three. After gathering your team around you, start by drawing attention to any good plays you observed. Then, mention your three
areas for improvement, always using the double positive approach. At
the end of your talk, summarize your advise by using key words or
phrases (e.g., "Help each other with an early call, look for the through
pass, and be first to the ball.").
The messages you give should be factual, containing information and
advice. Equally important is the need to be careful when speaking to
tions.

individual players. You don't want to destroy a player's confidence by

drawing attention to an error; who needs to be reminded that they shot
wildly over the goal? A player who tried a shot and failed needs encourage-

ment to keep taking the responsibility to shoot at goal. A good approach
as follows: "Chris, don't worry about that miss, because if you don't
shoot, you don't score; but do try to keep your composure when you
shoot." This approach recognizes that a mistake was made but allows
the player to retain his or her dignity and at the same time provides an
instructional point for the player to assimilate. Only in this way do players
learn; remember the advice in chapter 2 to open the mind of the player.
is

Physical and Mental Preparation

325

After the Game
After the game, I thank the referee and the coach of the opposing team.
They are (or should be) friendly colleagues seeking to encourage the same
goals as you are, and they have the same emotions! When 1 talk to players
after the game, 1 use one of four strategies, which depend upon the result
of the game and the manner in which the team played. The latter point
is more important in determining what I say and how I say it. The four
strategies are as follows:
1.

The team played well but lost.
"Well done! You played well today and should feel no

Approach:

disgrace in losing."
Reason:

A track and field athlete who achieves a personal best may
not win the event but will gain satisfaction from having performed well. Similarly, if your team really did play well,
players should not feel despondent because the result went
against them. The best team doesn't always win.

2.

The team played well and won.
"Well done! You played well, and you deserved to win."

Approach:
Reason:

Let your players enjoy victory, and enjoy it with them. At

the same time try to get your players to associate winning

with playing well. The best team doesn't always win, but
it

3.

usually does!

The team played badly and lost.
Approach:

"Well, we didn't play very well today, so we didn't win.
We'll work it out at practice.

Reason:

If the

team didn't play well there is no point in disguising

the fact, but remember that nobody plays badly on purpose. Don't dwell on failure and don't criticize your players

when they are down.
4.

The team played badly but won.
Approach:

"We didn't play very well today, but at least we still won!
See you at practice."

Reason:

You want your players to enjoy having won, but you know
that it was a poor performance and that at the next coaching
session you will be working hard to improve their play.

326

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

These four strategies provide the basis of what you need to say to the
whole team after the game. I try to leave the "winning is everything"
philosophy to the professionals, and 1 try not to overreact to either victory or defeat. As Rudyard Kipling advised, "Treat those two impostors
[success and disaster] just the same!"
A coach of young players must try to ensure that the players love playing soccer regardless of the result. With young players, I try to promote
the importance of the intrinsic satisfaction of playing well over the extrinsic

reward of winning.

CHAPTER 20

Handling
Problem Players
Every coach has to deal with problem players, from violent or argumentative players to those who simply arrive late for practice every week.
Coaches must deal with so many different kinds of problems that any
"solutions" are at best little more than suggestions about how to approach
a problem. Nevertheless, many problems have a familiar pattern or cause
and 1 feel it is worthwhile to identify these problems and to consider ways
in which they might be resolved.
This chapter begins with prevention, because I feel that many of the
problems I have had to face could have been avoided with better management! Problems very often develop as a direct result of your own personality or the manner in which you approach a situation.

Prevention, Not Cure
Have you ever considered that players only become difficult when they
behave in a manner that conflicts with your personal views about what
should be done, about what you think is right? Players who conform to
the coach's expectations rarely cause a problem; the nonconformists are

more difficult! For this reason, I always make sure that players understand my general expectations. 1 also let them know that my expectations
are accepted by parents and assistant coaches. For example, I tell players

327

328

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

my views about punctuality, about giving notice if a player cannot attend
my players

practice or has to leave early, and about the attitudes I expect

to demonstrate toward officials, opponents, and teammates. In this way
I

try to establish with

my players an agreed-upon code of practice that

will ensure that everyone knows what is expected.

Second, I try not to take good behavior for granted. 1 make a point of
reinforcing the code of practice from time to time by rewarding behaviors ranging from shaking hands after the game to never arguing with

the referee.
Third, I try to be consistent. Consistency is one of the hallmarks of a
good leader. Players should be able to anticipate how you will react in
given situations, and they should be able to model their behavior after
yours. For example, you cannot tell your players not to argue with the
referee if you yourself enter into a public argument with the same official.
Similarly, you must react consistently with different players and offer no
special privileges for your best players.

Fourth, I always try to be optimistic that any problem can be resolved.

This approach is a challenge to my initiative and usually elicits a better
response from players. Imagine the reaction of a player to a coach who

"Oh dear!

I don't think I can help you improve."
and perhaps most importantly, I have learned that it doesn't
always pay to try to find an immediate solution. Certainly, some situations do require an immediate, almost instinctive, reaction (e.g., a sharp
word of caution to a player who is about to start an argument). Most of
the problems examined in this chapter, however, are more deep-seated
and will test both your knowledge and your management skills. With
many of the more serious problems, the player must first accept that he
or she really does have a problem. As I shall argue, finding out that you
cause other people a problem can be an embarrassing or hurtful experience. Spending time preparing your strategy will often pay off in the long

said,

Fifth,

run.
Finally, please remember that the way to handle a problem player might
be to enlist outside help, for example, another player, a friend, a parent,
or a doctor. What matters most is that the problem is solved, not who

solves it.

The Ball Hog
Ball hogs are usually skillful dribblers because they get so much practice

with the ball, and they often mature into good adult players. Certainly
they believe that by keeping possession they are acting in the best interests
of the team because they will eventually produce a game-winning play.
Generally, however, they hold the ball too long, lose possession, and

Handling Problem Players

329

frustrate teammates, especially those who have worked hard to get into

good supporting positions. Worse still, other team members might even
stop running to support them or be reluctant to pass the ball to them.

Solutions
Start with a question to the player: "Do you realize that on occasion you
hold the ball too long and that this is hindering our team play?" Depending upon the answer you receive, and given that the player cannot correct
the problem alone, you can use any or all of the following strategies.

In Practice

Explain to the player that for set periods of time, he or she will be conditioned to play two-touch (or even one-touch) soccer. This forces the player
to release the ball quickly and requires the player to run hard to get into

good supporting positions. This will demonstrate to him or her just how
frustrating it is to run into good positions but not receive a pass.
If the player

shows improvement you can begin to relax this condition

(e.g., he or she can play normally

when in the opponents' penalty area).

Also, supplement team practices with 1 vs. 1 dribbling competitions

so that the ball hog and others can practice their dribbling skills. This
is

most important as it provides the ball hog a legitimate stage upon which

to demonstrate prowess.

On l\/latch Days
Give special reminders to the players during pregame talks; for example,
"Be content to beat one defender," or "Remember that it is dangerous
to dribble in your own penalty area."
Set targets; for example, "Last week you were caught in possession
of the ball four times. Can you improve on that today?"
Include in your match analysis a record of how many times a player
destroyed team play as a result of trying to dribble too much.
Finally, give the ball hog special responsibilities during set plays to help
encourage the spirit of unselfish teamwork. For example, put the ball hog
in charge of set moves that require the player to make the decoy run.

The Violent Player
There are two different kinds of violent players: the hothead who is guilty
of frequent, short outbursts and the player who demonstrates a less frequent but more deep-seated problem.

330

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

The Hothead
Hot-tempered outbursts can usually be traced to specific triggering
moments such as a hard tackle or a bad call by an official. Some solutions are as follows.

Prevention
In your pregame talks, remind hotheaded players that soccer is a body

contact game that involves hard physical knocks.

Remind such players that officials will make mistakes and that players'
reactions to such mistakes must always be tactical, not emotional. When
a bad call is made, every player should concentrate on getting on with

the game so that no one is surprised by a quick counterattack. The player

who argues or reacts emotionally loses concentration on the game and
temporarily becomes a liability.
Reinforce your points by giving players a model to follow. For example,
illustrate your pregame talk with a reference to a fine professional player,

preferably a soccer player.

Correction
If preventive

measures fail, you must employ correction or punishment

of some kind. In order of severity, these include the following.

Be prepared to substitute the player for a cooling-off period, even
though the referee might let an incident pass. If short penalties fail
to have an effect, substitute the player for the remaining period of
the game.
• Do not include the player in your starting line-up. This will emphasize that playing on your team is a privilege too valuable to sacrifice

•

for a momentary lapse of control.
• If the player does not respond to other measures, you will probably

have to suspend the player for a set number of games. Hopefully,
your hotheaded player will eventually realize that staying cool means
staying in the game!

The Deep-Seated Problem
Players do exist who deliberately inflict pain and suffering on others. This

kind of violence is characterized by deliberate kicking, late tackles, tackling

over the ball, and fouling when the referee's line of sight is obstructed.

There are three solutions.

Handling Problem Players

331

Expulsion

You can simply expel the player from your team. By doing so you will
undoubtedly earn the gratitude and respect of many of your players who
know that such behavior is degrading to them by association. Because
they are members of the same team, such behavior reflects badly upon
them; worse, they may also resort to violence.

Reeducation
Alternatively, you can try to reeducate violent players. In effect, you will
be using soccer as a vehicle for socializing the player, because this kind
of problem is not caused by soccer but is brought to the game by the
player. You can try the following strategies.
•

In practice games let the problem player referee; this may help to

develop a soccer ethic. Talk to the player privately, pointing out that
violence on the soccer field is just as bad as any other violence because
it

violates one of the most important ethical principles— respect for

other persons. State your views on violence at team talks. You need
not necessarily mention individuals by name, but you must make

your views public and so reinforce your code of practice.
•

In competitive games, substitute the player immediately after you
see a violent act, especially if the referee fails to see the foul or take
action. Or,

suspend the player for a fixed number of games.

Outside Help
Seeking outside help is not acknowledgment of failure on your part; on
the contrary, it is an example of detached, objective thinking. Such help
requires the knowledge and consent of parents or guardians, which reinforces the point that not all problems have an immediate or easy solution.

Solving serious problems takes time and thought!
If all these solutions fail, then you must expel the player from your team.

You must retain your own integrity as well as the integrity of your team
and of the game of soccer. If you take this step, explain your reasons to
the player (even if you have to write to him or her) and offer your help
if

the player wants to try again. This gives the player the opportunity

to reflect upon his or her behavior and leaves the door open to try again.

The TimSd or Frightened Player
The player who "chickens out" of a tackle or a 1 vs. 1 duel is in many
ways more difficult to handle than the violent or aggressive player. You

332

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

can always command the latter from the field, but you cannot always
command the timid player to be brave. A player must want to win the

and players who lack this inner drive are difficult to coach. Some
young players, for example, will go to great lengths to avoid heading the
ball. Even among professional players are those who can be intimidated.
Such players will develop a high degree of subterfuge and become adept
at arriving at the ball a fraction too late, jumping out of the way to avoid
a tackle, or kicking the ball away too hastily. Such avoidance tactics do
not happen by chance; players employ these tactics out of fear of being
ball,

injured.

Solutions

One recognized procedure to overcome fear or anxiety that is very popular
with swimming coaches is called counterconditioning. With this technique
the player is first removed from the stressful situation and then reintroduced to it in small stages. For example, the frightened nonswimmer is
reintroduced to the water through an "anxiety hierarchy" of sitting by
the pool followed by gentle, confidence-building activities. When applying this technique to soccer we can approach the problem in two ways.

In Practice

You can give the player special coaching in four key soccer skills, all of
which involve a positive act by the player. These are moving to the ball,
tackling, shooting practice,

and heading.

In each of these practices you should carefully explain the progressions,

using the following procedure.
Reintroduce the player to the anxiety-provoking skill in small stages.
Make sure that at each stage you allow the player time to enjoy success
and thus gain renewed confidence. Give the player your individual personal attention. If you cannot join in the practices as an active performer,
choose your helpers wisely and make sure that they are fully informed
about what you are trying to do. Use positive reinforcement and, above
all, be patient.
In Games

In competitive or even practice games it is more difficult to give your

problem player direct help because the other players control the situation. However, you can reward and reinforce successful actions and keep
a match analysis.
Use a pregame talk to remind the player to think and act positively and
to avoid undue worry about the possibility of injury. Remind the player

Handling Problem Players

333

Keep a record, and encourage the
player to keep a personal diary of the number of successful plays during

of successful practice experiences.

each game. Ideally, the number will increase during the season and thus
encourage the player. Positively reinforce every occasion during the game
in which the player acts courageously, and use these as examples in future
tactics talks. Finally, place your timid player in a position

on the field

that reduces the possibility of body contact and gives increased room to

maneuver. For example, place the player first as a winger; then as the
player's confidence grows put him or her into more physically demanding positions. You can also play the timid player short periods of time
and by careful substitution reward increasing determination with longer
periods of play.

Above all, be patient. You might on occasion successfully force a positive
response from a player by loud verbal encouragement, perhaps even mild
bullying. But use this approach carefully with sensitive, possibly introverted players, as this approach may inhibit, not improve, performance.

The Dictator
The dictator thinks and acts for everyone, gives a constant stream of commands, and dominates all around, including the weak referee and sometimes the coach. A well-meaning dictator is a problem; a dictator who
is also a bully is a much more serious problem. Two such players on one

team will cause conflict and other players may take sides to the detriment of the entire team.

Solutions
There are two starting points for dealing with a dictator. First, in your
team talks and during practical coaching sessions stress the importance of
a good first call. You do not have to explain the single-channel hypothesis
(p. 249); a simple practical demonstration of the confusion caused when
several players all shout at the same time will make the point.
Second, players must clearly understand the difference between shouting and talking to colleagues. Emphasize that only two types of calls are
helpful to the player with the ball. These are "time" (which means the
player has time to look up and play the ball) and "player-on" (which
is a signal that a challenge is imminent).
Make sure that all your players, including the dictator, are fully aware
of what is meant by good communication. Then try the following
strategies.

334

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

In Practice

In practice, play silent soccer (p. 298), conditioning the dictator to silence.
In this way you will demonstrate that other players can think and act
for themselves and will emphasize that successful teamwork depends

upon thinking for oneself. The dictator must realize that excessive shouting can reduce team effectiveness.
In Games
If the dictator is a

good player and is well liked, then he or she may make

a good captain. Appointing the dictator captain allows this player to talk
to other players during the game. If you use this strategy, you must initiate the dictator into the skills of leadership. For example, teach the player

to use encouragement rather than negative criticism, to recognize good

and to lead by example.
your dictator does not possess leadership qualities or is too unpopular
to appoint as captain, then you need another strategy. In pregame talks,
remind him or her of the continuing need to recognize the difference
between shouting and calling; and use goals to work toward behavior
change (e.g., the player tries to go 20 minutes without shouting at teammates or tries to save calls for those moments in the game when they
can be really useful).
If all of these solutions fail, then short periods of substitution following
an incident will help to get the message across.
plays,
If

The Poor Tactician
The poor tactician persistently makes the same kind of mistake during a
game and as a result either ruins a good play or exposes the defense unnecessarily. Typical examples include the attacker who continually runs
offside; the defender who rushes in and commits himself or herself un-

necessarily; and the midfield player who makes too many inaccurate or

poorly planned passes.

Such "unthinking" actions are not done deliberately, but they have
The coach can use two
methods to improve tactical awareness. The first method is described in
chapters 6 and 7, which established the importance of using small-team
games to develop tactical appreciation, and in chapters 17 and 18, which
discuss several ways of coaching better teamwork (e.g., attack versus
defense, individual positional plays, and coaching in the game).
The second method, which is useful for the coach who has a particularly difficult problem to resolve, is based on recent thinking in the field
to be minimized if a team is to be successful.

1

Handling Problem Players

335

of behavior modification psychology. The method involves a careful analysis of the problem followed by the construction of a checklist that is used

to monitor progress.

I

will explain the method using the example of a

player who continually runs offside, but keep in mind that the method
is

the same whatever the problem.

The Offside Problem
•

Sit

down with the player and analyze all the possible reasons for being

caught offside. This will inform the player as well as provide information
for your checklist. The causes can be divided into two groups, those for
which the player is personally responsible and those over which he or
she has no control.
The player is not responsible when the referee gives a bad call or when
teammate
delays the pass too long. The player is responsible when he
a
or she falls for a deliberate offside trap played by the opposition; runs
too soon out of anxiety to gain the advantage; fails to look both ways
along the line of the defense; turns his or her back on the passer and
runs away; or forgets the rules and stands in line with the defenders.
•

Arrange the factors that the player can control into a grid (Figure 20.1).

•

Each time the player gets caught offside, the coach records the reason

why.
•

Behavior modification theory does the rest, with a little help from

you! Now the player is personally involved, is able to analyze and evaluate
the reasons for the mistakes, and becomes both more knowledgeable and

more coachable.

Reason

Date

^

Caught in an offside trap

Ran too soon
Failed to look both ways

Turned and ran away from passer
Didnt know the rules

Figure 20.
Offside checklist.

336

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Dropping a Player
Every time you select a team you are in danger of losing a friend! Those
you don't select are going to be disappointed, and their self-esteem will
take a beating. How can you drop a player and still retain his or her respect
and allegiance to the team? My advice is as follows.
Be sure that the player being dropped is the first to know; don't let

him or her find out second hand. Tell the player personally. This is a
you cannot delegate to others. Give the player an
honest reason. If it is a matter of tactics (e.g., you want to play a different
system) or if it is for reasons such as injury, which are not related to loss
of form, then the task of informing players is easier. The difficulty comes
when the player has lost form and is playing badly.
I seldom drop a player because of one bad game. First, this would be
an admission of poor selection on my part. Second, a player can have
a poor game for a variety of reasons, such as very superior opposition,
poor support from colleagues, or personal reasons.
Third, the player will probably realize that he or she had a bad game
and will seek to improve on the next occasion. In all these cases, a coach
can do much between games.
When a sequence of poor games occurs, I still only drop a player when
I have a replacement or can implement a change in tactics that is likely
to improve performance. 1 don't drop a player unless I have an alternative
responsibility that

strategy.
Finally, 1 try never to drop a player from the team in one move. 1 prefer

to use the substitutes' bench as a platform both onto and off the team,

unless I have a second or lower team on which an immediate place is
available.

Talking to the Player You Have Dropped
The above strategies are all related to one objective— a concern for the
self-esteem of the player. It is easy to hurt the pride of a young player
and, worse, turn him or her away from soccer. When you discuss the
reasons that resulted in the player being dropped, try to do so in a manner
that focuses on the way the player acted, not one that makes a judgment
on the player as a person. For example, consider a player who continually
avoids going into a tackle. To bluntly tell the player that he or she is
"chicken" would be to attack the player as a person. Such an opinion
might be true, but it would probably hurt the player's feelings considerably. A better way would be to highlight two or three examples during
the game when the player's judgment or decision not to move into the
tackle was wrong and exposed the team in a way that cannot be allowed

Handling Problem Players

337

poor judgment of the player, not
to continue. This puts the focus on the
base it is much easier to rehabiliof
on his or her character. From this kind
tate the player and eventually restore him

or her to the team. At the very

to practice and knows exactly
least, the player has something concrete

what you expect in improvement.

CHAPTER 21

Fitness for Soccer
Fitness training is a complex subject that embraces many different ele-

ments. This chapter includes those elements that are directly relevant to
soccer and that can be addressed by any coach who has access to a field,
a stopwatch, a tape measure, and some markers. Of course, muscular
strength and mobility are important, but the coach who is limited to a
few coaching sessions a week must give priority to the major fitness element in soccer— the ability to run.
The drills in this chapter require a minimum of equipment, and I hope
they wUl provide every coach with practical advice that can be applied
in all circumstances. I have developed and used this unique battery of
tests over many years. For each of the tests I provide the standards
achieved by international and Olympic players and include some useful
data for boys (I do not yet have any data for girls or women).
Fitness training is, by definition, demanding. It is your duty to check
the physical condition of your players and keep record of their condition. It is also your responsibility to ensure that training is progressive.
Give your players time to improve, always give them a thorough warmup, and cater to individual differences. It is also your responsibility to
have first aid equipment available and to be able to use it.

Five Strategies for Fitness Training
Fitness training for soccer can be based on five ideas. First, study and
identify the fitness requirements that are unique to the sport and the
different positions within the team. In soccer, for example, every player

339

340

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

needs to develop the kicking muscles, but wingers are more likely to
on speed and acceleration while midfield
players need endurance training.
Second, train players in one fitness component at a time. Of course
all of the components are related, but each one requires a different training regime. 1 always target a specific goal and conduct my program

benefit from concentrating

accordingly.

Third, keep in mind that a soccer team comprises 11 individuals with

varying physiques. A training method that works with one player may not
work with another. The skillful coach designs an individual program for

each player that can be facilitated by employing the methods 1 recommend
Individual programs are much more effective than giving every-

later.

one the same exercises, and the tests I have designed really do enable
you to train individuals in a group system.
Fourth, keep records so you can analyze the success or failure of your
program. Careful records enable you to compare performances over a
number of seasons and between different teams. Indeed, with select teams
you can even set minimum qualifying standards similar to those used
in other athletics, and you can easily compare performances of players
within your squad.
Finally, strive to motivate players so they will want to train hard. Good
supervision and extrinsic motivation are important, but far more important is the intrinsic, self -motivating drive of wanting to improve. Training

should never be a punishment. I try to add enjoyment to activities through
carefully graded handicap situations, which are easily arranged.

To get players fit you must understand how the body releases energy
and how it responds to exercise. Fortunately, the necessary physiological
information can be reduced to a small number of easily remembered facts,
which are included at the beginning of each section.
Let us again take note of the potential dangers of fitness training. Players

need time to improve, so make your work progressive. Players are different, so try to accommodate these differences and don't expect everyone
to do the same amount. Things can go wrong, so make sure that you
have a first aid kit available and that you can attend to simple accidents.

Cardiorespiratory Fitness
Like a car, the body has two kinds of energy. The car has a battery for
starting and gas for sustained running. The body uses the glycogen in the

muscles to start activity, but it needs a supply of oxygen to continue. An
activity that does not use oxygen is anaerobic; one that does use oxygen
is aerobic. Soccer players need both aerobic and anaerobic fitness. They
use short bursts of energy and yet continue to play for up to 90 minutes
or longer.

Fitness for Soccer

341

Aerobic Fitness
To improve aerobic fitness, young players have to run continuously for
20 to 30 minutes. They have to run at a pace fast enough to elevate their
heart rate to over 130 beats per minute, and they must do this three times
a week. This means that you will have to encourage your players to run
on days when you do not have team practice, because running uses too

much practice time.
Testing Aerobic Fitness

The most famous and the best field test of aerobic fitness is Dr. Kenneth
Cooper's 12-minute run/ walk test. Ask your players to run or walk for
12 minutes, and measure how far they travel. A fit youngster will cover
1-1/4 to 1-1/2 miles depending on age and sex. A very fit youngster will
cover up to 2 miles. However, aerobic fitness is related to body weight,
so make allowances for heavy players (and try to help them slim down).
Fortunately, just playing soccer helps children to develop aerobic fitness,

and this is one of the benefits of the game.

Anaerobic Fitness
Soccer calls for repeated bursts of strenuous activity, and this kind of fitness is developed through interval training, which varies the ratios of

work and rest. It is important to get these ratios right to avoid a by-product
of exercise called lactic acid, which begins to accumulate after 30 seconds
of hard exercise. I therefore recommend that you either work players for
less than 30 seconds and give them a rest of 60 seconds between runs,
or keep them working for 60 seconds or more but then give them a longer
rest (e.g., 4 or 5 minutes).

When assigning repetitions for interval training, start small and increase
gradually. You should determine the number of repetitions by the age

and level of fitness of the players. I believe that three repetitions are
enough for children under 12, even those who are very fit. Players should
not attempt five repetitions unless they are very fit and are over the age
of 16. I never give adults more than six repetitions because the players
begin to pace themselves and this detracts from the training effect. 1 feel
it is better to have quality work.
Testing Anaerobic Fitness

The timed shuttle-run test is an excellent field test of anaerobic fitness.
It is reliable and easy to understand and is very hard work, but the standards are related only to men and boys. Coaches of girls' and women's
teams should collect their own data.

342

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

THE TIMED SHUTTLE RUN TEST
The shuttle run is a well-used but rather boring form of training that with
a simple modification became one of my most successful activities for both
testing and training. It reflects very well the soccer pattern of running,
stopping, turning, and accelerating.
You should use this test after a warm-up and should not follow with
any other tests, as players will need several minutes to recover from lactic
acid build-up. If you are using the activity for general training, I advise
you to do so at the end of your coaching session.
Equipment
1 stopwatch.
Organization

A total of 6 chalk lines are drawn at 5-yard intervals. The player
stands at the start line.
Instructions

On the command "go," the player sprints to the 5-yard line, touching it with one foot, and returns to the starting line, touching that
line with one foot. Without stopping, the player follows the same

procedure with the other lines: 10-yard, 15-yard, 20-yard, and
25-yard lines (Figure 21.1). The time for each run is recorded and
the total time calculated.

25 yd

Path of player's run

5 yd

Figure 21.1

The shuttle run.

Fitness for Soccer

Table 21.1 Typical Scores for Youth
a 60-Second Rest Between Runs

343

344

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

PASS AND RUN
Equipment
2 balls for each 3 players;

ample cones or flags.

Organization

Players are in teams of 3 (teams of 4 for younger players). Chalk
lines are drawn 25 yards apart,

with 2 additional markers placed

5 yards from the end lines as shown in Figure 21.2.
Instructions

In turn, each player makes a set number of runs. As the runner
comes to the 5-yard marker, the server passes to the runner who

immediately passes the ball back to the server.

The runner then turns and sprints back across the area to the other
5-yard marker, where the passing sequence is repeated with the next
server.

A useful challenge is to see how many passes players can

make in a given amount of time.
Coaching Progressions
The runner starts with the ball. As the runner approaches a marker,
he or she passes to the waiting server, who returns the ball. The
runner then dribbles to the other end and repeats with the other
waiting server (Figure 21.2).

A,

Pass and receive

Dribble

Pass and receive

Figure 21.2

The runner must head the ball back to the server. The pattern of
running remains the same as do the number of repetitions and the
rest period given (Figure 21.3).

-

"'A

Head back
turn and sprint

Figure 21.3

Fitness for Soccer

345

The active player receives a thrown ball, controls it, passes back to
the server, turns, and sprints across to the other side. Again the
quality of service from the thrower must be supportive (Figure 21.4).

,

o o O o

' ','--^3°

-C'^.'-o^oooooooO
Control and return

Control and return

Figure 21.4

Designing Your Own Activities
These drills are simple to design using a basic process. You must measure
the distance the player has to cover, record the time taken to complete
the drill, and control the rest period between repetitions as well as the

number of repetitions players complete. Review my recommendations
about the severity of the workload to prescribe for young players. If you
have fit adult males, give them six 40-second repetitions with a 40-second
rest as a starting activity and see how they respond. Now that you know

how to control the variables, the drill is in your hands!

Acceleration
The ability to accelerate is priceless in soccer, and you must try to improve
this ability in all your players including the goalkeeper. Acceleration is

a result of three things: mental alertness, strong muscles, and practice.
Practice is the most important of all with young players because the body

how to accelerate. The muscles have to establish movements, and the brain has to lay down what are called cell assemblies,
which are little groups of brain cells that control the actions. Players must
keep speed work to less than 10 seconds duration, which reduces the
possibility of lactic acid accumulation. Such training is called anaerobic
literally must learn

alactic training.

The two best tests for speed of acceleration are the Hargreaves 4-second
acceleration test, which I designed, and the zigzag test, which is a modified version of the old Illinois agility test.

THE HARGREAVES 4-SECOND ACCELERATION TEST
Equipment
10 markers; 1 stopwatch.

346

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Organization

Players are in groups of 12 or more (1 runner,

1

timekeeper, 10

judges). Markers are placed at the following distances from a start
line: 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,

and 32 yards.

Instructions

The runner stands with his or her back to the direction of the sprint
and with both heels on the line.

On the command "go," the runner turns and sprints past as many
markers as possible in 4 seconds.

The timekeeper starts the watch on the command "go" and then
concentrates on the second hand. When the hand reaches 4 he or
she shouts "now." The timekeeper has to be accurate. An error of
0.1 is allowed either way (i.e., 3.9 or 4.1), but outside this margin

the test is invalid. With practice, a good timekeeper can achieve a
high degree of accuracy, especially if a digital watch is available.

To count the number of markers passed, use players who have
already run or are waiting for their turn.
Players must wear cleats and the test must be done on flat, firm grass
(Figure 21.5).

Figure 21.5

Table 21.2

Standards for Young Players

Age (years)

Distance (yards)

19

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

Fitness for Soccer

347

How Do Your Players Measure Up to Internatioiial Players?
The average distance covered by professional players and Olympic hockey players
is 30 yards. The record is 32 yards.

Using the Test as Training
Measure how far your players run in 4 seconds and then reverse the practice. Start them at their best distance and let them sprint back to the start.
By putting 2, 3, or 4 players against each other, you make each run
into a race and provide competition. Players of different speeds can compete because of the handicap difference. The back runner can see those
in front and w^ill try to catch them; the front player runs as fast as possible
to avoid being caught. This is good motivation and good fun.
For an elimination activity, follow the same organization but this time
the winner in each heat is eliminated. Those left try again until only 2
players are left. Of course, you will also organize "winners' races" while
the main group is resting to ensure that everyone runs the same number
of sprints during the session. In this way you will soon identify which
are the fastest and the slowest sprinters and you can then train them
accordingly.

ACCELERATION ACTIVITIES
Select players of equal ability and organize the following activities:

Through the Legs

Figure 21.6

348

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

A has the ball.
B faces A with legs wide apart.
A passes the ball through the legs of B who has to turn, accelerate,
and stop the ball as quickly as possible (Figure 21.6).
Progression

Arrange a marker between 5 and 10 yards away. Player A now has
to pass the ball just hard enough to permit B to stop it before it
reaches the marker.
This practice depends upon how well A judges the force of the pass.
Too soft makes the challenge too easy; too hard and player B will

not even try to accelerate because he or she will see that the task
is impossible. Given time to practice, all players will quickly improve
because the challenge to both players is infectious.

Turn and Go

Figure 21.7

Two players stand back to back and at equal distance from the ball.
On command they turn and accelerate. The first to touch the ball
wins. No tackling is allowed (Figure 21.7).
Turn and Tackle
Players stand back to back. B has the ball.

On command, B dribbles forward, while A has to turn and chase
(Figure 21.8).

Fitness for Soccer

349

Figure 21.8

Backing Off and Turning— For Defenders

Figure 21.9

Players face each other. A runs gently forward causing B to backoff. A now accelerates past B, either left or right. B has to turn and

stop A from getting by (Figure 21.9).

Do this several times across the field and then change positions.

350

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Resistance Running

Figure 21.10

A and B hold the towel while C tries to sprint (Figure 21.10).
This practice is well-known to sprinters and is excellent for condition-

ing the leg muscles which accelerate the body forward. However,
make sure the towel is in good condition and warn players not to
let

go of the towel.

THE ZIGZAG TEST
This test is based on the Illinois agility test. Five posts are arranged in
the shape of an X. The distances between the markers in the rectangle
are 16 feet and 8 feet. The center marker is placed where the diagonals
intersect. The player must wear cleats,

and the grass must be firm and
The test range should be positioned on spare ground because the
constant turning quickly damages the turf. The flags must be at least 4
feet tall to prevent the player leaning as he or she turns. The player runs
flat.

in a figure eight pattern (Figure 21.11).

Table 21.3

Standards for Young Players

f

Fitness for Soccer

351

How Do Your Players Measure Up to International Players?
Professionals can complete one run in less than 6 seconds, and 3 runs in 18 to

19 seconds.

—

•r

Start

Finish

Figure 21.11

ZIGZAG COMPETITION
Arrange 3 or more sets of posts as shown in Fig. 21.12. Start 3 players
simultaneously and let them compete against each other, or you can
arrange elimination and handicap events. It is important to also run the
players in the reverse direction around the makers. In this way, you ensure that they practice turrung to the left and the right in equal proportion.

D

Figure 21.12

352

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Speed
Speed and acceleration are closely related. In soccer we are more concerned with acceleration because a player seldom sprints more than 30
yards at a time. However, players must also practice sprinting distances
between 30 and 40 yards. In this way they will improve acceleration and
be able to sustain speed when they are involved in a race for the ball.
In track and field sprinting, running style is important. The body leans
forward, the head is kept still, the arms pump forward and backward
in a straight line, and the knees are raised high to increase stride length
and drive the athlete forward in a series of explosive bounds. The whole
motion is elegant, balanced, and controlled. In soccer the player enjoys
few of these opportunities, and for this reason running style is less important. Indeed, the arms are usually carried low and moved across the
body, the head is moved about to watch the ball and other players, the
body remains upright, and the stride length is much shorter because the
player must prepare to arrive at the ball or change direction.
For all these reasons, speed training in soccer should always be done
on grass, in soccer shoes, and if possible in competition with someone
of similar ability. Don't worry about style; let your players practice what
they do naturally and simply emphasize the basics— using the arms and
driving the legs. As with acceleration, what matters is that you give the
players the opportunity to practice the act of sprinting.

Testing for Speed

•

There are many tests of speed. The following speed test enables you to
evaluate a whole team very quickly and without any help.

THE HARGREAVES 50-YARD FLYING START TEST
Equipment
3 markers; 1 stopwatch.

Organization

The players are in a group of unlimited number on a field marked
as follows.

Measure 50 yards along the sideline with the halfway line as the
midpoint. Then measure 50 yards into the field along the halfway
line, and mark all three points with a corner flag or post.
The players stand 15 yards from the starting point because they need
this distance to reach maximum speed as they start the timed sec-

Fitness for Soccer

353

tion. The timekeeper looks along the line of the posts and both starts

and stops the watch as the player breaks the line of the posts (Figure
21.13).

Timekeeper
Figure 21.13

Instructions

Players normally have 2 attempts with only the fastest time being
recorded. Players have at least 5 minutes rest between trials. This
is

needed to let the players walk back to the start and to recover.

Players wear cleats and soccer clothing. The grass should be flat and
level and firm. Wet or soft conditions will reduce performance times.

Players must be properly warmed up.

Table 21.4

Standards for Young Players

354

Skills and Strategies for Coaching

Soccer

Speed Training Activities
The following three training activities are both popular and effective. They
make an excellent finale to a training session or can be used before you
move into game practices. All are based on team competitions.

CIRCULAR AND CONTINUOUS RELAY
Equipment
6 corner posts; 1 relay baton or stick.

Organization

Players are in groups of 7; two players are at the starting post, the

other 5 are as shown in Figure 21.14.

Figure 21.14

Instructions

The coach gives a starting signal. The relay continues until Player
G has completed his or her 6th run and everyone else is now back
in their starting positions.

Coaching Progressions
Two teams race against each other but in the opposite direction. This
is highly motivating because the players cannot easily judge who
is winning until the final two runners converge on and cross the
finish line.

Two teams race. You record the difference in time between them
and handicap the winning team by that amount for a second race.

Fitness for Soccer

355

SHUTTLE RELAY 1
Equipment
2 markers for each 4 players.
Organization

Players are in teams of 4 between 2 markers fixed 30 yards apart;
players stand as shown in Figure 21.15.

,C

D

A,

Figure 21.15

Instructions

Players exchange the baton as in a normal track and field relay (e.g.,
Player A passes to Player B). Each player sprints in turn until all
4 have finished.

By timing each team, you can introduce handicap races (e.g., the
slowest team starts).

SHUTTLE RELAY 2
Equipment
2 markers for each 6 players.
Organization

Players are in teams of 6 positioned near 2 markers placed 50 yards
apart (or less if you want to use this practice for acceleration) as

shown in Figure 21.16.

Figure 21.16

356

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

Instructions

The incoming player runs to the left of the marker. The receiving
player holds his or her hand behind the marker to receive the baton. This prevents any cheating by starting too soon.

Pressure Training
Pressure training is fun and is a very effective training method. It involves
selecting one player and normally one skill such as heading or collecting

the ball. You then serve the player balls in a continuing stream, starting

slowly and then increasing the tempo as the player becomes accustomed
to the practice. The drill becomes harder and harder for the player, who

has to try to maintain a high skill level even when tired— hence the name
pressure training.
Organizing pressure practices is quite simple. You either provide one
server with a plentiful supply of soccer balls and some helpers to replenish the stock or provide several players with balls who serve in turn to
the player under pressure.

For example, to practice heading, have three players stand in a triangle
with a ball each (Figure 21.17). One player stands in the middle. Each
server throws the ball in turn, and the header has to return the ball to
each server in sequence. The speed of the throws depends upon the ability
of the header.

Figure 21.17
Practicing heading the ball.

Fitness for Soccer

357

Figure 21.18
Diving heading practice.

To practice diving heading one player kneels down and receives a continuous service from one or two servers (Figure 21.18). The rate of service
depends upon the skill and response of the header, and the ability of
the servers to recover any misdirected returns. Provide the servers with
an ample number of soccer balls. With advanced players, the service can

be directed to either the left or right of the receiver, who responds with
extended diving movements similar to those used in the full-game situation when attacking the goal.

Skill Circuits
The final way to increase players' fitness in an interesting and enjoyable
way is to design a skill circuit. To do this you plan a series of soccer skills
in a sequence and let the players take turns competing against each other
or against the clock (Figure 21.19). With imagination and some equipment
you can play any number of skill circuits, even with only a few markers
available.

Start the stopwatch and the first player simultaneously. Start all the

other players at 15-second intervals, letting the watch run. When each
player finishes, deduct the starting time from the finishing time to see

how long it took to complete the circuit (performance time). A sample
record is shown in Table 21.5.

358

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer

30 yd

••

Wall pass to
assistant coach

A

or player

A
r

start

Coach/timekeeper

Finish

Figure 21.19

A field set up for skill circuits.

Table 21.5

Circuit Results

Glossary
aerobic— Exercise that uses oxygen.

anaerobic— Exercise that does not use oxygen and that produces lactic
acid.

angle, narrowing the— Moving toward the player with the ball; especially

applied to goalkeepers.

angle of passing— Direction of pass in relation to either the defending
or supporting players.
angle of run— Direction a player runs in relation to a specific situation.
angle, widening the— Movement of the receiving players into usually safer
receiving positions; also describes the movement of the player in posses-

sion of the ball who may adjust position in order to create better passing
angles.

back door— See blind side.
back four— Conventional defensive lirie comprising right back, two center
backs, and left back.
ball— Alternative term for pass (e.g., good ball).
ball watching— Attending to the position of the ball but failing to see the
tactical situation that is developing or the movement of a specific player.

blind side— The side or direction on the side of the ball opposite the
defender. Also called back door.
block tackle— Committed frontal tackle done in an attempt to win the ball.

box— Penalty area.
calling— Verbal help between teammates.

center— See cross.

359

360

Glossary

closing down— Advancing to restrict space in front of an opponent while

covering his or her path to goal.

come off your man— Avoid the player covering you in order to create
space in which to receive the ball.

commit the defender— See defender, commiting the.
control, cushion— Control of the ball by withdrawing on impact the surface in contact with the ball (e.g., the thigh).
control, platform— Control of the ball with the use of any flat surface of

the body.
control, wedge— Control of the ball with the use of a rigid surface (e.g.,

the sole of the shoe).

cover— To stand behind a teammate who is challenging the player with
the ball. In team terms, having enough players goalside of the ball to
defend adequately.
cross— A long pass played, often diagonally, into the center of the field.
Also called center.
cross, far-post—

A cross aimed toward the goalpost farthest from the

kicker.
cross, near-post—

A cross aimed toward the goalpost nearest the kicker.

crossover— When a player running without the ball crosses the path of
the player who has the ball. Also called scissors.

decoy run— Movement in which a player runs into a position to pull
defenders away from certain parts of the field so a more effective pass
can be made to a teammate filling the resulting space.
defense, back of the— The area between the rearmost defenders and their

goalkeeper.

defender, committing the— Moving toward or past a defender, with or

without the ball, in such a way as to attract the attention of that
defender, allowing him or her no opportunity to observe other attackers
or tactical development.

disguise— See feint.
dribble— Close, skillful control of the ball, especially when seeking to beat
a defender.

dummy, selling the— Successful attempt to trick or unbalance and therefore gain advantage over a defender.

early ball— Pass played at the first possible opportunity, usually into space
for a teammate to move into.

eye contact— Method of nonverbal communication particularly to initiate
rehearsed moves.
feint— Action that attempts to confuse or trick the defenders. Also called
disguise.

Glossary

361

flank— Area of the field up to approximately 15 yards of the touch lines.
flight, line

of— Flight path of the ball.

give and go— See push and run.

goalside of the ball— Position between the ball and the goal one

is

defending.

half-volley— Volley in which contact is made with the ball immediately
after it hits the ground (i.e.,

on the fly).

instep— Upper surface of the foot or shoe (i.e., the laces).
ins werve— Path of a ball that curls in toward a target,

jockeying— Holding up or delaying the advance of an opponent who
has the ball, usually by trying to force him or her toward or along the
touch line.
killer pass—Through pass that splits the defense.
late tackle— Challenge that, whether intentional or accidental, makes unfair contact with

the player after he or she has played the ball.

line of recovery— Path a defender takes when running back toward the

goal to get goalside of the ball.
lofted drive- Powerful kick with the instep through the bottom half of

the ball,

mark— To cover a player closely to prevent the opponent from receiving
the ball.

marking, one-on-one— A system of defense in which all defenders mark
their own particular opponent (e.g., at a throw-in).

narrowing the angle— Moving nearer to an opponent in order to reduce
his or her passing or shooting opportunities.

offside trap— Play in which a defensive player or unit, usually acting on
a call or signal,

moves forward in such a way as to catch at least one

opponent in an offside position.
off the ball— Movement away from the area around the player who has

the ball.

one-touch play— Play in which the player passes the ball immediately after
receiving it.

one-two pass— A pass involving an immediate return ball.

on the ball— When an individual player is in possession of the ball.
outswerve— Path of a ball curling away from a target.

chip— Pass made by a stabbing action of the kicking foot to the
bottom part of the ball to achieve a steep trajectory and heavy back-

pass,

spin on the ball.
pass, half-volley— Pass made by the kicking foot contacting the ball at

the moment after the ball touches the ground (i.e., on the fly).

Glossary

362

push— Pass made with the inside of the kicking foot.
pass, swerve— Pass made by imparting spin to the ball, causing it to
swerve. Which way the ball swerves depends on whether contact with
the ball is made with the outside or the inside of the kicking foot, and
pass,

on which side the ball is kicked.
pass, volley— Pass made before the ball touches the ground,

penetration— Principle of play used to assess a team's ability to break
through the opposition's defense.
peripheral vision— Outer part of the field of vision.

pitch— Field of play.
play, conditioned— Play to which an artificial restriction has been applied
(e.g., all

players must pass the ball on the first touch).

play, crossover

— Play in which two attacking players move in opposite

directions past each other. These movements are usually made with

the ball but can also be made without it.
play, shadow— Method of coaching that allows players to create move-

ments without opposition.

A defending player who supports the first defender
by adopting a position that will enable the covering player to challenge

player, covering—

if

the first defender is beaten.

player, supporting— An attacking player who is positioned to receive a

pass from the player in possession of the ball.
pressure training— Method of training players in rapid succession for a
limited period.

push and run— Play in which a player plays a short ball to a teammate
and immediately runs, often for the return pass. Also called give and go.
run, blindside— Run by an attacker on the side of the ball opposite the

defender.
run, overlap— Movement of an attacking player from a position behind
the ball to a position ahead of the ball.

running off the ball— Tactical run to support a teammate who has the ball.

run with the ball— To move with the ball without dribbling past an
opponent.
scissors— See crossover.

screening the ball— See shielding.
selling oneself— Overcommitting oneself to a challenge for a ball and

being beaten.
set piece— Restart after an infringement or when the ball goes out of play
(i.e.,

goal kicks, throw-ins, corners, indirect free kicks, and direct free

kicks, including penalties).
set plays— Moves worked out in training to exploit set pieces.

Glossary

363

shadow marking— Assigning one player to mark a dangerous opponent
closely for the whole match.

shadow play— Training technique in which players create movements
without opposition,

shielding— Maintaining control and possession of the ball by keeping
one's body between the ball and the challenging opponent. Also called
screening the ball.

showing oneself— Making it obvious to the player with the ball that one
is

available for the pass.

sliding tackle— Tackle made by sliding one's supporting leg along the

ground.
space, creating— Increasing the distance from opponents.

square ball— Any pass made across the field that is approximately parallel
to the goal lines (at right angles to the touch line).

square defense— Defense spread in a line across the field. Such a defense
is lacking depth and is vulnerable to the killer pass, and is thus said
to be caught square.

stretched defense— Defense that is spread out and has no cover.

support play— Assisting the passer by moving into positions which increase his or her passing opportunities.
support, wide angled— Support at an angle wide enough to give the
greatest possibility for passing the ball forward,

sweeper— Defender who plays behind and covers the rest of the defense.
swerve— See inswerve and outsiverve.
switching the play— Changing the point of the attack, notably with a
crossfield ball.

tackle— A challenge, using the foot, to win the ball.
taking a player on— Trying to beat a defender by dribbling past him or her.
target

man— Front player who presents himself or herself as a target for

midfielders' passes.

thirds of the field— Areas roughly 35 yards in length signifying the

defending, the middle, and the attacking thirds of the field.

through pass— A pass played between two defenders into the space
behind them, into which a teammate runs.
top roll— Forward rotation on the ball, in a straight line, which causes
the ball to hug the ground.
turning one's opponent— Causing an opponent to turn, usually by playing
the ball past or by moving past him or her.

turning with the ball— Receiving the ball when facing one's goal and
turning, with the ball under control, to face the opponent's goal,

volley— Kicking the ball before it lands.

364

Glossary

wall— Line of players forming human barrier against a free kick near goal.
wall pass— A pass between two attacking players, in which the player
acting as the wall plays the ball the first time, at a similar angle to

which the player received the ball. The pass is usually made behind
an opponent.
wall player— Player acting as the wall in a wall pass.

weight of the pass— Pace or force of a pass.

wide player— Front runner or attacking midfielder who plays near the
touch line, not necessarily a winger.

winger— Attacking player whose main role is to play out wide, get to the
goal line, and supply crosses to teammates in the central areas.
work-rate— Player's overall physical contribution to the team effort, particularly running off the ball and covering.

wrong side— The side of an opponent that allows the opponent to get
between a defender and the goal.
zonal defense— Defensive system in which each member has an approximate area or zone and is responsible for covering any opponent who
enters that zone.

About the Author

Alan Hargreaves, MA, MEd, played for Lancashire, Loughborough
Colleges and English Universities. A fully qualified Football Association
coach, he directed national residential coaching courses for players up
to 18 years of age and co-directed the Soccer Academy for Young Players
in California. He was head coach for the British Colleges soccer team and
coached professional soccer for five years— two years with Stoke City and
three years with Crewe Alexandra. He has conducted numerous coaches
and players courses in England and California and is a consultant in Fitness Training for soccer and hockey.
Formerly chairman of the Madeley School of Graduate Physical Education,
Alan directed the fitness training program for the 1980 and 1984 British

Olympic Men's Field Hockey Team. He has also worked extensively in
universities, soccer coaching clinics, and residential camps, many for the
American Youth Soccer Organization.
In his leisure time, he enjoys golf and traveling.

365

J

Skills and !$trategies

for Coaching !$oecer
The key to successful coaching is getting your players to make successful decisions on the field. Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer
gives you the tools to do just that. You'll have access to over 100 drills
for teaching skills and techniques; more importantly, you'll know how
to develop these skills in realistic game situations with beginning, intermediate, and advanced players.
Essential skills are presented, including collecting and controlling,

passing, dribbling, kicking, heading, goalkeeping, and the throw in.

But the unique feature of this book is that for each skill presented,
you'll find drills for players at different levels of development.

And no one knows the importance of skill development better than
Alan Hargreaves— one of England's top soccer coaches. He has coached
5 -year-olds to pros, using the same skills and techniques presented in
this

book.

With Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer you'll learn the what,
how, and why of soccer through
• offensive moves and countering defensive moves,
•

120 drills for beginning, intermediate, and advanced players,
coaching points for each drill,
•

•

a fitness program for soccer,

•

sample game situations and how to coach in those situations,
• 246 high-quality illustrations of field diagrams and skill
execution, and
• methods of coaching appropriate to individuals or groups.
•

Skills and Strategies for Coaching Soccer is an indispensable guide

for coaches in any settirr

^^

ISBN D-fifi011-35fl-b

90000

Leisure Press

780880"113281

