                               The Science of Rondo

                  “Progressions, Variations & Transitions”



   I was introduced to rondo some twenty years ago as a player, however no one told me it was

called “rondo” nor did they explain the objectives of the game. At the time there were actually

coaches preaching what an unrealistic training exercise rondo was. They believed it taught the

direct opposite of what you want your players to do because after passing the player stood still—it

did not teach movement off the ball. In college we played rondo once a in a great while and only

as a fun activity before training actually started. There was no intensity level or understanding of

its real purpose. To us it was just a keep away game with no real purpose. Now, twenty-three

years later, as a seasoned head coach I have a totally new appreciation and understanding of

rondo, which I’d like to share with you!



   Let’s start off with a few quotes from famous players who used rondo to develop into some of

the world’s best players.

“Everything that goes on in a match, except shooting, you can do in a rondo. The competitive

aspect, fighting to make space, what to do when in possession and what to do when you haven’t

got the ball, how to play ‘one touch’ soccer, how to counteract the tight marking and how to win

the ball back.” ~Johan Cruyff (Legendary player for FC Barcelona and Holland)



“It’s all about rondos. Rondo, rondo, rondo. Every single day. It’s the best exercise there is. You

learn responsibility and not to lose the ball. If you lose the ball, you go in the middle. Pum-pum-

pum-pum, always one touch. If you go in the middle, it’s humiliating, the rest applaud and laugh at

you.” ~Xavi (One of the best midfielders in FC Barcelona and Spain’s history)
Rondo Defined:

   If I had to define “Rondo” it would be as follows: Rondo is a training game in which the group

who is possession has a numerical advantage. Rondo can be as little as 3 v 1 to 10 v 2 over

another group of players. The objective of the group in possession is to keep the ball away from

the defenders, while the defenders objective is to win the ball.

   Rondo is different than other possession drills because the players take up a pre-set space in

the circle rather than roaming all over. Many possession drills will have players move to spaces

that relate more to the movements of a regular game. However, some of the rondo variations do

involve movements out of the pre-set typical rondo spaces.




Rondos develop players in the following ways:

Decision Making & Number of Touches: Players need to think very quickly in rondo as the ball

can move very fast. Being a step ahead and having good vision is required to maintain

possession. The number of touches a player gets in rondo is high. In a typical 11 v 11 game

players touch the ball between 20 and 40 times. In rondo they can have the same number of

touches in 5 minutes. The more meaningful touches, the more a player will improve.




Technique, Mobility & Agility: In order to keep possession the players must have a good level

of technical ability. Pep Guardiola the former FC Barcelona Coach would talk about playing on

the edge your technical ability, while still maintaining possession with solid technique. The faster

the ball moves in rondo the faster the players need to execute. This includes being balanced,

mobile, quick, agile, technical and making quick decisions.



Teamwork and Collective Understanding: Rondo is not an individual game.

It requires teamwork to possess the ball. It also requires teamwork of the defending players to

win the ball back therefore; the understanding between the players is enhanced as they begin to

work as one unit.
Problem Solving & Creativity: Problem solving in soccer is the name of the game! Can players

find solutions to break down the opposition’s defense? Rondo tests the player’s ability to problem

solve the entire time. Being creative can often help break down a defense.



Competition: Rondo is an enjoyable fun environment that creates an atmosphere of healthy

competition. Competition pushes players to train at higher intensities and elevate their game.
Is Rondo An Overnight Fast Track to Success?


   It is very important to understand that Rondo does not build skill overnight. In fact, the

midfielder Xavi explains that the secret to rondo is not found out in one week, one month or one

year. You get more and more out of rondo the more you train rondo. Players have to hit certain

levels of skill to fully reap all the benefits of rondo and that can literally take years. At FC

Barcelona, players normally do between 1,500 and 1,800 hours of rondo between ages 6 to 20.

Deliberate practice states that 80% of the training should focus on 20% of the most important

skills. It is obvious that Barcelona places a very high value on rondo. I understand that not many

teams can play like Barcelona but the ability to possess the ball in tight spaces against high

intensity opponents can be useful for any team.




Here are key terms to remember when playing rondo:


First Line Break/Pass – pass to the person next to you. Easiest pass to make in rondo. Does

not require a wide range of vision.



Second Line Break/Pass - The pass will bypass the person next to you but does not split

defenders. The second line pass requires a little larger passing vision. This is slightly more

difficult than the first line pass.



Third Line Split Pass - This is a ball is the money ball that splits the defenders through the

middle. This pass requires the most skill, creativity, vision and timing to pull off. In soccer the

ultimate goal is to get the ball forward and score. Third line split passes help develop this skill.
Key Points for All Rondo Training:



I will not put these key points down for every rondo drill in the book. However, these key points

will most likely apply to every rondo drill. Remember these key points!




Key Points:

1. Stay on the balls of your feet with an open stance ready to receive the ball from any side or

    forward direction and pass the ball to any side or forward option (forward angle passes as

    well).

2. Always be focused and mentally into the game. Try to get into a high-level zone of

    performance and concentration.

3. Try to think one or two steps ahead of the play. Speed of thought equals speed of play.

4. Have fun and bring energy to the group. There is nothing wrong with having tons of fun if the

    training is of the highest quality.

5. Let your teammates know when they did well or when they need to pick it up. Clap and shout

    to celebrate the great passes and defensive plays! Teams that demand a high level of

    performance from each player get better faster.

6. Speed of play, creativity, teamwork, sound technique and problem solving are all very

    important.

7. The importance of keeping possession as an individual and team is the primary objective but

    look for Third Line Splitting Passes when they present themselves. Forward passing is what

    scores goals and those opportunities need to be taken when they are available.

8. Establish a rhythm to the passing. The tempo of play and rhythm is critical for success.
How I Teach Rondo:



   Here is a brief explanation of the way I teach rondo. First, my team plays rondo every single

day in one form or another. We are always changing up numbers, rules, grid sizes and variations

of the game. The goal is to get players problem solving and thinking by changing the variables.

Our program places a lot of value on teaching players to be thinkers and problem solvers. The

more a player develops their cognitive ability in training the more of an intelligent soccer player

they become. Changing the rondos also helps with eliminating the feeling of “oh this again”. The

progressions, variations and transitions really help keep players stay intense and motivated. My

next experiment is to have my team play rondo in the sand! Have fun with the rondos and see

what works best for your team. I would like to hear your feedback after you implement the new

rondo ideas!



   Feel free to contact me with any questions or thoughts. I can be emailed directly from my blog

at www.coachdibernardo.com. Also, be sure to check out my book "The Method" Redefining the

Art of Soccer Coaching and Management. Keep an eye out for future "The Method" Books

coming out soon as well. You can buy the method online at Amazon.

http://www.amazon.com/dp/B00HYHL9OI
                                       Exercise One

                                Fundamental Rondo
Players: 7v2

For basic rondo a 10 yard x 10 yard grid is fine for 6v2 all the way up to 9v2. For smaller

numbers like 3v1, 4v1 or 4v2 make the grid a tiny bit smaller. I prefer tighter spaces if the players

can handle it. If you see players are having a lot of difficulty keeping the ball make the grid

bigger, increase the number of touches allowed, and even eliminate one of the defenders. It may

take some time, but eventually players will become more skilled at rondo and keeping rhythm in

possession will be possible.



Grid: 10 yards x 10 yards in which players form circle. They can go outside the grid a foot or so

but the idea is to keep the circle shape and not make the circle larger.



Key Points & Objectives

   Stay on the balls of your feet with an open stance ready to receive the ball from both sides or

from a forward direction while being able to pass the ball to both sides or forward. Always be

focused and mentally into the game. Try to get into a high level zone of play and concentration.

Begin to think one or two steps ahead of the play. Have fun and bring energy to the group. Let

your teammates know when they did well or when they need to pick it up. Clap and shout out the

great passes and defensive plays! Speed of play, creativity, teamwork, sound technique and

problem solving are all very important. The importance of keeping possession as an individual

and team is a primary objective but look for Third Line Splitting Passes when they present

themselves.



It is very important to keep a high passing tempo while finding a rhythm to the possession.

The book is going to cover many variations but remember rondo is usually played one or two

touch.
Fundamental Rondo:
                                      Exercise Two

                           Breaking the Lines Rondo



Players: 6v2 to 9v2 recommended



Grid: 10 yards x 10 yards in which players form circle. They can go outside the grid a foot or so

but the idea is to keep the circle shape and not make the circle larger.



Key Points & Objectives

Players must play the pass through one line with every pass.

The pass has to cross a line before it is received by another teammate.

Players are forced to increase their passing vision when lines are removed in the progressions.

The game becomes harder with the removal some lines.



Note: The set-up works better with tape or string/rope on the floor to create the zones. You can

use cones to define the outside grid space. The ball needs to roll freely over the zones so cones

do not work well for marking inside lines.
Breaking The Lines Exercise A) Notice the circle is split into six zones.




Breaking The Lines Rondo Exercise B) Notice the circle is now only split into
four zones. This is the logical next progression to exercise “A”.
                                     Exercise Three

                                     Moving Rondo


Players: 5v2 to 9v2 recommended



Grid: 10 yards x 10 yards in which players form circle. They can go outside the grid a foot or so

but the idea is to keep the circle shape and not make the circle larger. The variations below will

need two grids than four next to each other.



Key Points & Objectives:

Players look to complete four passes and then play their teammates into the open grid. The

group at the point all has to run into the open grid following the pass. Players do not have to run

keeping the shape of a circle. Once they get into the next grid they can regain the shape of the

circle and look to complete four passes again before sending ball into the open grid. The players

in possession can make more than four passes in the same grid but they can’t play in the open

grid before four passes are completed. You can change the number of passes and players to

adjust for skill level. This is a high energy and free flowing game of rondo that the players enjoy.
Moving Rondo Exercise A) One Team with Two Grids




Moving Rondo Exercise( B) Two Teams with Four Grids
                                      Exercise Four

                       Two Team Color Coded Rondo
Players: 4v2 to 9v2



Grid: 10 yards x 10 yards in which players form circle. They can go outside the grid a foot or so

but the idea is to keep the circle shape and not make the circle larger. This exercise requires two

grids with 5-10 yards separation. You can set-up grids side-by-side or diagonally from one

another.



Key Points & Objectives:

One grid will be playing 8v2 for example. The other grid will be passing the ball in circle with no

defenders. Every player in the game has a partner. Partners wear the same color bib/vest. You

can do five or six colors and even repeat some colors. If the defenders win the ball the person

who gave the ball away and his partner must run to the other grid and be the defenders. This is

very challenging because defenders may be running from behind you into the circle looking to

steal the ball. Players must be scanning and always looking around to see where the pressure

may be coming from. The energy and intensity levels in this version are always very good.

Players do not want to let their partners down or stay in the middle pressuring the ball that long.
Two Team Color Coded Rondo
                                      Exercise Five

                               Moving Circle Rondo
Players: 5v2 to 10v2

Grid: 10 yards long x 25 yards in width. Players should make the regular 10x10 circle leaving 15

yards space to side.



Key Points and Objectives:

The group must try and keep the ball as the circle moves together until they reach the end of the

25yard width. If they are still in possession the group should try and travel back the other

direction. The actual game of rondo is played like exercise one. If a player gives the ball away

he changes with the defender quickly by tossing them the bib (bibs always held in hand and not

worn). Some people like to switch both defenders but unless you have even numbers I see no

need to. Moving rondo gives the players a collective problem to solve. They must work together

to be successful.



Moving Circle Rondo
                                       Exercise Six

                                Line Passing Rondo
Players: 6v2 to 10v2



Grid: 10 yards x 10 yards in which players form circle. They can go outside the grid a foot or so

but the idea is to keep the circle shape and not make the circle larger.



Key Points & Objectives:

The coach will instruct the group in first line and second line passes. Game One: Players are not

allowed to make any first line passes (can not pass to person next to you) only second and third

line passes. Game Two: After any first line pass the next pass must be second line or third line.

Feel free to throw in your own rules and variables. This game works very well to increase

concentration in rondo while increasing passing vision, speed of play and thought. Use the same

rules as fundamental rondo.



Line Passing Rondo
                                       Exercise Seven

                        Rondo to Possession to Rondo


Players: Two Circles of 3v1 to 10v2



Grid: Two grids 10 yards x 10 yards in which players form circle. The grids should be separated

by 5-10 yards. Players can go outside the grid a foot or so but the idea is to keep the circle

shape and not make the circle larger. Both grids need to be inside a bigger square grid. The size

of the larger big square depends on the total number of players being used. A 35x35 larger grid

for a total of 18 players is a starting point.



Key Points & Objectives:

Example: Rondo Grid #1 10x10 - will have 7 Red players and 2 yellow defending players. Rondo

Grid #2 10x10 - will have 7 Blue players and 2 yellow defending players. The defenders do not

change in the middle for the rondo. After two rotations of the exercise you can switch the yellows

out. Let the two grids play rondo for 2-3 minutes and then call “Combined Play”. This will mean

the 7 Red will play against the 7 Blue with the 4 Yellow being neutral players who help the team

in possession. The game is two touch and players can go anywhere in the larger square grid

which can be around 35x35 for 18 players. After 1 minute the coach will say “rondo” the teams

will go quickly back to their own rondo grids and to continue their rondo play.
Rondo to Possession to Rondo
                                      Exercise Eight


     Rondo Transitions To Passing Patterns, Technical

                                Training and Fitness


Players: For these variations it depends on how many players per group you want to use and

what you are transitioning back and forth to. Groups can be 3v1 to 10v2.



Grid: 10 yards x 10 yards in which players form circle. They can go outside the grid a foot or so

but the idea is to keep the circle shape and not make the circle larger.



Key Points & Objectives: The basic idea here is to get creative with the transition between

rondo and another training drill that makes sense. I like to transition from rondo to either passing

patterns or fitness. I set up the grids close together so the transition is quick. When the Coach

calls “rondo” the players engage in rondo and when “passing” or “fitness” is called the group

rotates to those drills. I like to time these, so I typically spend 3 minutes rondo and 3 minutes

passing patterns or fitness. You can design it the anyway you like. The important part is that

there is little down time in transition and players are always training focused and well.
Rondo To Passing Patterns




Rondo To Fitness
                                      Exercise Nine

                               Sliding Player Rondo
Players: 5v2 to 9v2



Grid: 10 yards x 10 yards in which players form circle. They can go outside the grid a foot or so

but the idea is to keep the circle shape and not make the circle larger.



Key Points & Objectives:

Sliding rondo is simply rondo with a player who can slide into the middle and help keep the ball

with the rest of the team. The middle player can either stay the entire time or take turns sliding in

and out of the middle at any time. I like having the middle player sliding in and out as another

player takes his spot in fluid motion without the game being stopped. It adds another layer of

complexity and teamwork to the exercise.



Sliding Player Rondo
                                       Exercise Ten

                                   Rondo Variations
Players: It depends on the variation you are using for the rondo.



Grid: 10 yards x 10 yards in which players form circle. They can go outside the grid a foot or so

but the idea is to keep the circle shape and not make the circle larger.



Key Points & Objectives:

These variations can be worked into rondo training to make the players problem solve, adapt and

find solutions.

    A) Follow your pass: For 7v2 to 10v2 rondo have players follow their pass and move to the

        persons position you just passed the ball to. Encourages movement after passing.

    B) Do a push up after passing: This makes it impossible for the person you just passed the

        ball to give it right back to you (you are doing your push up and are not ready to receive

        the pass). This reduces players passing options making them adapt quickly.

    C) Sprint back to a cone that is 5 yards behind each player in the circle: This does the same

        as the push up but it works on running fitness instead of upper body strength.

    D) Two touch both feet mandatory: This makes players receive with one foot and pass with

        the other. It leads to using both feet and playing in a quick 1-2 rhythm.

    E) Players must hold hands in circle: This makes the grid smaller and ball movement picks

        up speed. Teamwork and speed of play are needed.

    F) Mandatory cheering after six completed passes or split: This creates a fun energetic

        atmosphere and team bonding. It is a nice variation to get players to enjoy the training

        environment.

    G) Air Rondo: Start with the ball in the air, it can’t touch the ground. This is a high level very

        skilled form of rondo.

    H) Add up to four defenders in the middle as you increase outside numbers and inside

        possession player (grid would have to be enlarger)
                              Rondo Push Up Game
Players: 5v1 to 9v2



Grid: 10 yards x 10 yards in which players form circle. They can go outside the grid a foot or so

but the idea is to keep the circle shape and not make the circle larger.



Key points and Objectives:

After a player passes the ball, he must perform a "Push Up" and recover as quickly as possible to
be available for another pass.
                                    Exercise Eleven


                                        9v4 Rondo
Players: 13



Grid: 35x25 yards



Key points and Objectives:

The yellow team has 6 players positioned on the outside of the grid and 3 inside the grid.
The blue team has 4 players inside the grid. Start the game allowing all players two-touches.
 If the blue team wins the ball, they play 4v3 inside the grid, as the outside 6 yellow players must
stay on the outside. Once the inside 3 yellow players win the ball back, they can use the outside
6 yellow players to keep possession. As the group becomes more skilled, reduce the yellow
teams touches to one-touch. Variations include outside players one-touch and inside payers two
touch, all players one touch would be the highest level.

9v4 Rondo
                                    Exercise Twelve


                          Cognitive Rondo: Ball Toss
Players: 12



Grid: 10x10 yards



Key points and Objectives:

This game is the same as fundamental rondo but with a change. Start with one soccer ball or
tennis ball that a selected player will hold in their hands. The player must toss the ball to another
player while rondo is being played to another player. The ball is continuously tossed (underhand)
as long rondo is being played. The players are now forced to concentrate on two separate tasks
at the same time. They must be aware of two tasks, the ball being tossed and the rondo being
played. Players are forced to process information non-stop in cognitive rondo. The game can be
played 10v2 to start with one ball being tossed. Once the players become better at the game add
another ball to be tossed and caught. In the diagram the yellow circles represent the balls to be
tossed.

Cognitive Rondo: Ball Toss
                                   Exercise Thirteen

              Cognitive Rondo: No Same Color Passing
Players: 12



Grid: 10x10 yards



Key points and Objectives:

The set-up is the same as fundamental rondo using a 10v2 shape. The 2 defenders in the middle
are holding tennis balls in their hands. This lets the other players know they are the defenders. If
a player gives possession away, the defender simply tosses the incoming player the tennis ball.
The tennis ball simply replaces the tossing of the bib (tennis ball identifies the defenders). There
are 6 different pairs of players in this game. Each pair is wearing a different color bib/vest than
the other pairs. The rule of the game is players are not allowed to pass to the same color (their
teammate). Your teammate might be next to you, on the other side of the circle or playing
defense. It is crucial players identify the location of their teammate at all times. This will require
players to think quickly and process additional information in order to be successful. Variation:
require players to switch positions with the person they passed the ball to. This will make players
continuously have to scan to locate their partner.

Cognitive Rondo: No Same Color Passing:
                                   Exercise Fourteen


                            Rondo to 10v2 One Touch


This is the first of two drills I recommend to transition to once you finish rondo. These drills

compliment what the players were doing in rondo and the transition it virtually seamless. I added

these because my players really enjoy them and seem to get a lot out of them.



Players: 9v2 or 10v2 or with less numbers go 6v1 to 8v1.



Grid: 10 yards x 10 yards. No player allowed outside the grid. It is important to keep the space

tight and only 10x10.



Key Points & Objectives:

The game is 1 touch only. Players should not be in a circle like rondo. They need to be moving

inside the grid all the time on the balls of their feet ready to play one touch. The two defenders

have the bibs/vests in their hands and try to win the ball. If a defender wins the ball or it goes

outside the grid he throws the bib to the players who gave the ball away. The game should not

be stopping. Have a coach outside feeding balls in right away as soon as the ball is hit out of the

grid. Arsenal FC uses this drill and it is one of my personal favorites. It teaches quick play, one

touch passing and movement off the ball. This 10v2 one touch game is played in the same

10x10 grid as your rondo so the transition is seamless.
10v2 One Touch
                                    Exercise Fifteen


                      Game Related Rondo Transition


This next exercise is very closely related to the real 11v11 game. The rondo skills can be directly

used and seen in this game.



Players: 17-18 players



Grid: 35 yards long x 25 yards wide. You can feel free to change the grid size depending on your

objectives. If you want the players to be under a lot of pressure then keep the grid small, if you

want them to run a bit more then make the grid larger. Experiment and see what you like.



Key Points & Observations:

This is a touch two game with players set up in position specific spaces on the field. Each team

has two center backs, two outside wing backs, defensive center mid, passing center mid,

attacking center mid and a forward. There is also one neutral player on the field playing for the

team in possession. The neutral player helps the ball move swiftly. The objective is to move the

ball from your backs through the midfield and to your forward. Once the forward receives the ball,

the team will attempt to move the ball back to the defenders without losing possession. Once

possession is lost, players must work hard to get the ball back. Both teams are set up the exact

same way trying to accomplish the same tasks. Outside players are located in safe zones so

inside players can’t come out of the field and take the ball from outside players. The teams on

the inside can only play to their own players on the outside. The ball moves very fast in this

game, it is directly game related and many of the rondo skills will be used. If you are playing two

grids of rondo of 7v2 the transition is simple to this game and quick. The transition form rondo to

this game can be 90 seconds if everything is planned out well.
Game Related Rondo Drill
I hope you find the rondo progressions and variations useful. I would like to thank John, Mickey,

Curt and Jay my fellow coaches who have contributed to my soccer education.

   Remember, don’t be afraid to experiment and create new variations. You can always contact

me through my blog at www.coachdibernardo.com - I am happy to answer any questions!


Also feel free to check out my other books:

The Method - The Art of Coaching & Managing Soccer

The Science of Rondo - Progressions, Variations and Transitions

Professional Soccer Finishing Drills

Professional Soccer Passing Patterns

45 Professional Soccer Possession Drills: Top Drills From The World's Top Clubs

The Science of Soccer Team Defending

Soccer Smart




References and Sources:


“Our Competition is the World: Ideas for implementing the United States Soccer Curriculum.” By

Stan Baker, 2012. Lulu Publishing.



“The Talent Code” By Daniel Coyle. May 2009. Published By Bantam Dell. NY, NY.



“Coaching The Tiki Taka Style Of Play”, By Jed C. Davies. November 2013. Published By

Soccertutor.com
