    Elite
Soccer Drills

 Michael J. Matkovich
            with
      Jason davis




       Human Kinetics
                        Library of Congress Cataloging-In-Publication Data

Matkovich, Michael J.
 Elite soccer drills / Michael J. Matkovich with Jason Davis.
    p. cm.
 ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-7386-8 (soft cover)
 ISBN-10: 0-7360-7386-8 (soft cover)
1. Soccer--Training. I. Davis, Jason, 1973- II. Title.
 GV943.9.T7M315 2009
 796.334--dc22
                                       2008035438
ISBN-10: 0-7360-7386-8 (print)
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-7386-8 (print)
ISBN-10: 0-7360-8483-5-8 (Adobe PDF)
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-8483-3 (Adobe PDF)
Copyright © 2009 by Mike Matkovich
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in any form or
by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including xerography,
photocopying, and recording, and in any information storage and retrieval system, is forbidden without
the written permission of the publisher.
Acquisitions Editor: Tom Heine; Developmental Editor: Anne Hall; Assistant Editor: Cory Weber;
Copyeditor: Patsy Fortney; Proofreader: Coree Clark; Graphic Designer: Robert Reuther; Graphic
Artist: Kim McFarland; Cover Designer: Keith Blomberg; Photographer (cover): Phil Cole/Getty
Images; Photographer (interior): Neil Bernstein; Photo Asset Manager: Laura Fitch; Visual Produc-
tion Assistant: Joyce Brumfield; Photo Office Assistant: Jason Allen; Art Manager: Kelly Hendren;
Associate Art Manager: Alan L. Wilborn; Illustrator: Tim Brummett; Printer: United Graphics
We thank the Ultimate Soccer Arenas in Pontiac, Michigan, for assistance in providing the location for
the photo shoot for this book.
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book excerpts
can also be created to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America                   10    9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1
Human Kinetics
Web site: www.HumanKinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics                              Australia: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076                                              57A Price Avenue
Champaign, IL 61825-5076                                   Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
800-747-4457                                               08 8372 0999
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com                                   e-mail: info@hkaustralia.com
Canada: Human Kinetics                                     New Zealand: Human Kinetics
475 Devonshire Road Unit 100                               Division of Sports Distributors NZ Ltd.
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5                                        P.O. Box 300 226 Albany
800-465-7301 (in Canada only)                              North Shore City
e-mail: info@hkcanada.com                                  Auckland
                                                           0064 9 448 1207
Europe: Human Kinetics
                                                           e-mail: info@humankinetics.co.nz
107 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com
    Elite
Soccer Drills
           Mike Matkovich: For Dad


Jason Davis: For Kim, Jacob, Dylan, Mom, and Tim
                 Contents

       Drill Finder viii    Foreword    xiii     Preface   xv
            Acknowledgments xvii       Key to Diagrams     xix




Chapter 1     Becoming an Elite Player . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Chapter 2     Speed, Agility, and Coordination . . . . . . . 7

Chapter 3     Juggling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

Chapter 4     Dribbling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

Chapter 5     Passing and Receiving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61

Chapter 6     Heading  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93

Chapter 7     Attacking and Defending . . . . . . . . . . . 111

Chapter 8     Crossing and Finishing  . . . . . . . . . . . . 141

Chapter 9     Conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167


                       About the Authors 185



                                                                             vii
                                 Drill Finder
                                           Number of Players                               Offense/
 Drill                                            Small   Large     Goal     Maintaining   Defense/   Fitness
  #          Drill Title        Page Individual   group   Group    scoring   possession      Both     building
Chapter 2: Speed, Agility, and Coordination
  1      Acceleration            9        X         X          X                                         X
         Agility Ladder
  2                              10       X         X          X                                         X
         Work
  3      Stride Patterns         12       X         X          X                                         X

  4      Agility Running 1       14       X         X          X                                         X

  5      Agility Running 2       15       X         X          X                                         X

  6      Agility Running 3       16       X         X          X                                         X

  7      Jumping Patterns        18       X         X          X                                         X
         Sprint Work With
  8                              20       X         X          X                                         X
         a Ball
         Competitive Agility
  9                              22       X         X          X                                         X
         Training
  10     Agility Hurdles         24       X         X          X                                         X

  11     Star Agility Station    26       X         X          X                                         X

Chapter 3: Juggling
  12     Keep-Away (5v2)         30                 X          X                 X            X          X
         Individual Juggling:
  13                             32       X         X          X
         Around the World
         Individual Juggling:
  14     Pattern and             34       X         X          X
         Sequence
         Individual Juggling:
  15                             35       X         X          X
         Speed Juggling
  16     Two-Player Juggling     36                 X          X

  17     Group Juggling          38                 X          X
         Group Juggling
  18                             40                 X          X                                         X
         Relay
         Group Juggling:
  19                             41                 X          X
         Elimination
Chapter 4: Dribbling
  20     Slalom Dribbling        45       X         X          X                                         X

  21     Two Lines               46       X         X          X                                         X

  22     Retreat Dribbling       48       X         X          X                                         X




viii
                                        Number of Players                               Offense/
Drill                                          Small   Large     Goal     Maintaining   Defense/   Fitness
 #            Drill Title    Page Individual   group   Group    scoring   possession      Both     building
        Changing the
 23                           50       X         X          X                                          X
        Dribbling Angle
        Competitive 1v1
 24                           52                 X          X                 X            X           X
        Dribbling 1
        Competitive 1v1
 25                           54                 X          X                 X            X           X
        Dribbling 2
        1v1 Dribbling for
 26                           55                 X          X                 X            X           X
        Possession
        Competitive
 27                           56                 X          X                 X            X           X
        Dribbling Games
        Competitive
 28     Dribbling Games:      58                 X          X                 X            X           X
        Possession
 29     Dribbling to Goal     59                 X          X     X           X            X           X

 30     The Gauntlet          60                 X          X                              X           X

Chapter 5: Passing and Receiving
 31     8v2                   63                            X                 X            X           X

 32     Two Lines             64                 X          X                                          X

 33     Groups of Four        66                 X          X                                          X

 34     Triangle Passing      68                 X          X                                          X

 35     Rectangle Passing     70                 X          X                                          X

 36     Four-Point Passing    72                 X          X                                          X

 37     4v2 (+2)              74                 X          X                 X            X           X

 38     Passing Windows       76                 X          X                                          X

 39     Pairs                 78                 X          X                 X            X           X

 40     Groups of Three       80                 X          X                 X            X           X

 41     Windows               82                 X          X                                          X
        Angle Passing and
 42                           84                 X          X                                          X
        Receiving
 43     Partners              86                 X          X                                          X

 44     Pattern Passing       88                 X          X                                          X

 45     Circle                90                 X          X                                          X

Chapter 6: Heading
 46     Head Passing          96                 X          X
        Up-and-Back
 47                           98                 X          X                 X                        X
        Heading


                                                                                                   (continued)

                                                                                                           ix
                                            Number of Players                               Offense/
    Drill                                          Small   Large     Goal     Maintaining   Defense/   Fitness
     #          Drill Title      Page Individual   group   Group    scoring   possession      Both     building
    48      Heading to Goal      100                 X          X     X                        X          X

    49      Flick Headers        102                 X          X                 X                       X
            Heading Crosses
     50                          104                 X          X     X                        X          X
            on Goal
            Competitive
     51                          106                 X          X     X                        X          X
            Headers on Goal
            Handball With
     52                          108                            X     X           X            X          X
            Headers to Score
     53     Clearing Headers     110                 X          X

Chapter 7: Attacking and Defending
    54      Three-Goal Game      114                 X          X     X           X            X          X
            5v5 (+2)
    55                           116                 X          X                 X            X          X
            Possession
     56     Two-Target Game      118                 X          X                 X            X          X
            4v4 Square
     57     Possession With      120                 X          X                 X            X          X
            Bumpers
     58     Four-Zone Game       122                 X          X                 X            X          X
            Three Zones Over
     59                          124                            X                 X            X          X
            the Border
     60     Passing Gates        126                            X     X           X            X          X
            Possession to
     61                          128                            X                 X            X          X
            Targets
     62     Attack! Defend!      130                 X          X     X           X            X          X
            2v2 Make It,
     63                          132                 X          X     X           X            X          X
            Take It
     64     Four Corners 2v2     134                            X     X           X            X          X
            Two Zone Over
     65                          136                            X     X           X            X          X
            the Border
     66     6v6 (+6) to Goal     138                            X     X           X            X          X

Chapter 8: Crossing and Finishing
    67      Two-Post Finishing   148                 X          X     X           X            X          X

    68      Two-Goal Finishing   150                 X          X     X           X            X          X

     69     3v1 Finishing        152                 X          X     X           X            X          X
     70     2v2 to Two Goals     154                 X          X     X           X            X          X
            2v2 in the Penalty
     71                          156                 X          X     X           X            X          X
            Box




x
                                        Number of Players                               Offense/
Drill                                          Small   Large     Goal     Maintaining   Defense/   Fitness
 #          Drill Title      Page Individual   group   Group    scoring   possession      Both     building
        2v2 (+1) Serving
 72                          158                 X          X     X           X            X          X
        in the Box
 73     4v4 With Wingers     160                 X          X     X           X            X          X
        Partner Crossing
 74                          162                 X          X     X           X            X          X
        and Finishing
        Near- and Far-Post
 75                          164                            X     X           X            X          X
        Finishing
Chapter 9: Conditioning
 76     Cooper Test          171                 X          X                                         X
        Obstacle Fitness
 77                          172                 X          X                                         X
        Test
 78     Group Sprints        174                 X          X                                         X
        300-Yard Shuttle
 79                          176                 X          X                                         X
        Run
        120-Yard Sprint
 80                          178                 X          X                                         X
        and Recovery Run
 81     1v1 Keep-Away        180                 X          X                 X                       X

 82     15-Second Sprints    181                 X          X                                         X

 83     Fartlek Runs         182                 X          X                                         X




                                                                                                          xi
                    Foreword


Throughout my many years in the game of soccer, I have had the opportunity
to observe and get to know many of the game’s premier soccer coaches. In
my opinion, Mike Matkovich is without question one of the best. Known as
an outstanding teacher and trainer, Coach Matkovich has made a significant
contribution to the growth and development of soccer in the United States.
   His passion and knowledge of the game, along with his ability to teach the
game of soccer to youth players, is the driving force behind his success.
   As the director of the Chicago Magic Soccer Club, which is widely re-
garded as the top youth soccer club in America, he has spent countless
hours teaching and molding young players and has helped to change the
landscape of youth soccer. He has also shown his leadership in the pro arena
by coaching two promising teams, Toronto FC in its inaugural year with the
MLS, and Chivas USA. With Mike’s assistance, both teams have garnered
major victories in very quick succession in the major leagues.
   The proof of his ability to teach is in his achievements and in his players.
While at Indiana University, I had the privilege of working with a number
of Coach Matkovich’s former players, many of whom helped us win national
championships and are now playing professionally.
   I also competed against many of his former players. The two common
threads among all of those players are their outstanding ability to execute
the fundamentals of the game and their drive to be winners. I have no doubt
that this comes directly from the time they spent under Coach Matkovich’s
guidance.
   More recently, I have come to know Jason Davis as an outstanding coach
and developer of youth talent. My teams at Indiana University competed
against Jason while he was a player at the University of Akron, and in recent
years we have recruited players that Jason has helped to produce.
   Jason’s innovative training ideas and talent for helping young soccer
players develop into elite-level athletes is exemplified by the well-designed
activities assembled in this book.
   The drills in this book will help serious athletes achieve an elite level of
competition both as individual and team players. The chapters have drills



                                                                                  xiii
xiv      Foreword


        designed for individuals looking to hone their skills outside of team practice
        as well as activities designed for coaches who want to finesse their teams’
        prowess on the field. It is my privilege to endorse Matkovich and Davis’ Elite
        Soccer Drills, and I highly recommend the book to anyone who is serious
        about reaching a new level.
           Jerry Yeagley
           All-time winningest coach, NCAA Div-I
           National Soccer Hall of Fame Coach
                         Preface


Ten thousand hours. That is how many hours of training the experts say
it takes to become an elite-level athlete in any sport. Soccer is no different.
What the experts fail to mention, however, is that those ten thousand hours
of training must take place in the correct environment, with the correct con-
ditions, drills, supervision, and motivation.
    This book provides information to help you create the elite environment
your players need to accomplish their goals. It includes many of the drills,
activities, and philosophies I have used to help players become successful at
the individual and team level over the past 20 years. Whether your players
want to make a club, high school, or college team, or the Olympic Develop-
ment Program, the information in this book is invaluable.
    Each chapter in Elite Soccer Drills is devoted to a core area of the game.
The importance of setting high training standards and routines is covered
in chapter 1, as is the importance of improving players’ overall technical
levels through self-training and small-group training. By focusing on small
groups of one to four players, and then expanding the numbers when ap-
propriate, you can focus on individual players.
    Chapter 2 focuses on speed, agility, and coordination, the core components
of a player’s ability. At all levels, the ability to jump, sprint, and change di-
rections quickly is essential to success. This chapter includes exercises that
will help develop your speed, quickness, agility, and coordination, in a way
that is very soccer specific. The exercises can be done individually or with
a group, and can be adjusted according to the level of difficulty needed.
Additionally, please note that throughout the drill chapters (chapters 2-9),
the unit of distance given is yards. International readers who use the met-
ric system can substitute the same distance in meters. For example, if the
instructions use a distance of 20 yards, use 20 meters instead.
    The focus of chapter 3 is juggling and how a regular juggling routine can
help players’ overall ability with the ball. The chapter includes juggling
drills for one to five players and discusses ways to make juggling, alone or
in a small group, competitive. Variations address the use of various body
parts and the height, distance, and spin of the ball.



                                                                                    xv
xvi      Preface


           The focus of chapter 4 is dribbling. While the ability to dribble is one
        of the most basic skills a player has, it is often one of the most overlooked
        skills when it comes to actual practice. Many times, especially at younger
        ages (8-14), a coach will choose to focus on “team play” and passing, and
        sacrifices individual dribbling development in training. Chapter 4 is full
        of exercises that will help players develop and refine their individual drib-
        bling skills and ball control. These exercises will help players improve their
        ability to beat defenders off the dribble, dribble to retain possession, and
        dribble to create space.
           Passing and receiving are covered in chapter 5. Short, midrange, long,
        driven, and lofted passes are described and diagrammed. The chapter also
        includes drills that improve the mechanics and technique required for ex-
        ecuting these skills.
           The ability to head the ball effectively, with skill and purpose, is something
        that players often lack. Chapter 6 focuses exclusively on how to develop the
        ability to head the ball. The exercises in the chapter will help players with
        defensive heading, attacking heading (to goal), and with using heading to
        pass to a teammate.
           Chapter 7 helps players improve the tactical side of the game by practicing
        small- and large-group attacking and defending. On the attacking side of
        the ball, 1v1, 2v2, 3v2, and 3v3 tactical situations are covered in great detail.
        Defending in similar situations, as well as improving players’ ability to read
        the game and anticipate the play, are also described in chapter 7.
           Chapter 8 outlines the techniques, mechanics, and drills for the final
        and most crucial phases of play: crossing and finishing. Methods for im-
        proving those areas through self-training and multiple-player training are
        detailed.
           The final chapter is devoted to conditioning. From agility and quickness
        to aerobic and anaerobic fitness, all areas of fitness applied to soccer are cov-
        ered. The chapter includes drills for agility and quickness training with and
        without the ball, along with drills for endurance and speed training. Finally,
        a number of fitness tests, and proper standards for each, are described.
           The desire for self-improvement, on and off the field, is critical to suc-
        cess. However, only by knowing how to apply the correct methods and
        techniques, and by understanding the subtle nuances, can real development
        occur. We have used the methods and philosophies in this book to elevate
        teams and players to the highest youth and professional levels in the United
        States. By utilizing the exercises in this book you will have a great chance of
        reaching your goals, whether they are to make your high school team, play
        in college, or make it to the professional level.




xvi
   Acknowledgments


We would like to acknowledge the following people who have contributed,
directly and indirectly, to the content of this book and to our development as
people and as coaches: Brett Hall, Jim Launder, Tim Carter, Alex Hernandez,
David Richardson, Leo Ley, Dudley Duplee, Ken Lolla, Wayne Jentas, David
Linenberger, Simon Spelling, Robert Davis, Tony Hermiz, Don Gemmell,
Romero Aja, and Brett Jacobs.




                                                                                 xvii
                                         B     Team B player

                                         C     Coach

                                         D     Defender



Key to Diagrams                         GK

                                         L
                                               Goalkeeper

                                               Left foot

                                         N     Neutral player

                                         O     Opponent (general use)

                                         R     Right foot

                                         S     Server

A    Attacker/Team A player              T     Target

B    Team B player                       X     Player (general use)

C    Coach                               Z     Team Z player

D    Defender                                  Agility pole/flag

GK   Goalkeeper                                Agility hurdle

L    Left foot                                 Cone

N    Neutral player                            Soccer ball

O    Opponent (general use)                    Path of ball

R    Right foot                                Path of player

S    Server                                    Path of player dribbling ball

T    Target
                                     E4409/Matkovich/KEY/321078/TimB/R3-alw

X    Player (general use)

Z    Team Z player

     Agility pole/flag

     Agility hurdle

     Cone

     Soccer ball

     Path of ball

     Path of player                                                            xix

     Path of player dribbling ball
       chapter 1


         Becoming
       an Elite Player

Elite soccer players can be defined in a variety of ways. They are players with
great skill, great pace and quickness, great strength, and great intelligence.
One component, however, is often overlooked by both players and coaches:
mentality. The mentality of elite athletes, soccer or otherwise, is unique.
   Thousands of talented players have failed to maximize their potential
for the simple reason that they were not mentally strong enough. So many
players who have had skill, strength, and speed in abundance have failed.
Why? Mentality.
   The road to becoming an elite player is long and difficult. To make it to
the top, players must be willing to make sacrifices. Missing out on social
events, school events, and even family events is common among those who
make it. Elite players accept such sacrifices as necessary.
   Along the road, players may be told they are not good enough, smart
enough, or fast enough. They may be cut from teams, lose their starting
positions, or have long-term injuries. The need for the mental capacity to
overcome such setbacks and challenges cannot be overstated. Elite players
thrive on these types of challenges.
   Elite players must be motivated to improve constantly. Fine-tuning and
improving technical ability as well as physical ability are essential in the
quest to become an elite player. The motivation to improve in all areas of
the game must come from the players themselves.




                                                                                  1
2      Elite Soccer Drills



          Motivation
          Parents frequently say, “Training is just not the same without someone
          giving instruction” or “Jamie doesn’t work as hard when the coach is not
          there.” Although there is likely some truth in such comments, the real issue
          is whether the player is motivated extrinsically or intrinsically. The differ-
          ence is crucial.
             Extrinsic motivation is based on external factors and tangible rewards.
          Although important and effective, extrinsic motivation is often shortsighted
          because it focuses exclusively on the reward, not the action. Once attained,
          the reward is gone. Intrinsic motivation comes from within. The person gets
          enjoyment from the activity or wants to push himself or improve beyond
          what he has already accomplished. Intrinsic motivation has a long-term
          payoff: As long as the person wants to better himself, the reward is always
          out there.
             Clearly, to maximize ability, a player needs a combination of extrinsic
          and intrinsic motivation. However, only with a high degree of intrinsic
          motivation will that player reach her potential and make it to the highest
          levels of the game.


          What to Focus On
          Clearly, technique is the most important factor in a player’s ability to play
          at a high level. Therefore, in small groups the main focus should be on
          improving players’ overall technical ability, the ability to manipulate and
          control the ball under pressure.
             Cristiano Ronaldo, who currently plays for Manchester United, is a great
          example of a player with such focus. He spends hours after training working
          exclusively on his ability with the ball. His hard work has clearly payed off;
          he is recognized as one of the most technically gifted players in the world.
             In addition to technical skills, a player needs focus. The ability to grasp,
          understand, and react quickly to changes during a game can be the difference
          between winning and losing. When playing defense in a dead-ball situa-
          tion, for example, the slightest lapse in concentration can be the difference
          between conceding a goal and preventing a goal. A lack of focus in a player
          defending a corner kick can lead to an opposing player getting free, having
          a scoring chance, and changing the game.
             Unfortunately, parents and coaches in many sports still approach train-
          ing with an attitude best characterized as “peaking by Friday.” A short-term
          approach is taken to training and performance with an overemphasis on im-
          mediate results. We now know that a long-term commitment to practice and
          training is required for producing elite players and athletes in all sports.
                                                               CHAPTER 1   Becoming an Elite Player   3




Concentration, focus, and attitude are critical for success.



   Any teacher, coach, or mentor will say that the training players do on their
own is as, or more, important than organized team training. Developing a
regular training routine to improve individual ability is crucial to players’
development. Stories of David Beckham staying for hours after training to
practice his free kicks while at Manchester United are legendary. The list
of world-class players, including Beckham, Cristiano Ronaldo, Pelé, and
Maradona, who religiously train on their own is too long to mention. If such
training is good enough for the best players in the world, it is good enough
for your players too.
   Scientific research has concluded that it takes 8 to 12 years of training for
a player to reach elite levels. This is called the 10-year rule, or 10,000-hour
rule, which translates to slightly more than three hours of practice daily for
10 years.
   Both time and economic constraints make meeting the rule nearly impos-
sible if the only training a player does is with the team. Only by develop-
ing and maintaining a daily training routine, which focuses on the player’s
ability with the ball, will the player’s ability improve enough to meet the
technical demands of the highest levels.
4         Elite Soccer Drills



             Examples of Training Schedules
             The following tables show two examples of how to organize a week to maxi-
             mize time and training opportunities. Table 1.1 varies the focus each day
             so that a wide range of skills can be touched on, while table 1.2 maintains a
             focus on two skills for the entire week. These are simply examples and can
             be altered to meet the needs of individual players.
                There is no right way to set up a training schedule. The focus will depend
             on the number of players participating in the training. Because the number
             of players involved in each self-training session fluctuates, players need to
             be flexible. If a player finds herself in a group of four players on a day when
             she planned to focus on dribbling, it would make sense to use all of the play-
             ers and work on 1v1 or 2v2 attacking or defending principles.
                The most important aspect of self-training is developing a routine. Only
             over time will a player make drastic improvements in ability level. Self-
             training is a crucial part of that. Developing a routine is not easy. The first
             step is setting achievable goals. Goals can be either specific (e.g., being able
             to juggle the ball 1,000 times by the end of the season) or broad (e.g., train-
             ing outside of team practice three times per week).
                Setting goals to focus on will help keep players focused and energized.
             At times they will have difficulty keeping up with their routines, such as in
             bad weather or when a field is closed or being used. Finding unique ways to
             keep up with their routines is essential. For example, when it is not possible


Table 1.1

      Sunday             Monday           Tuesday       Wednesday       Thursday      Friday       Saturday
    Self-train          Self-train      Team/Club       Self-train      Team/Club   Self-train     Team/Club
       Focus:             Focus:         training          Focus:        training      Focus:       matches
    Playing 1v1        Juggling and                      Ball control               Juggling and
       or 2v2          long passing                     and Agility                   dribbling
        Time:              Time:                           Time:                        Time:
    60 minutes          30 minutes                      60 minutes                   45 minutes


Table 1.2

      Sunday           Monday           Tuesday         Wednesday       Thursday      Friday       Saturday
    Self-train       Self-train       Team/Club         Self-train      Team/Club   Self-train     Team/Club
       Focus:           Focus:         training            Focus:        training      Focus:       matches
    Juggling and     Juggling and                       Juggling and                Juggling and
                                        Self-train
      dribbling        dribbling                          dribbling                   dribbling
                                      Focus: Juggling
        Time:            Time:                              Time:                       Time:
                                       and dribbling
     30 minutes       30 minutes                         30 minutes                  30 minutes
                                          Time:
                                        30 minutes
                                                       CHAPTER 1   Becoming an Elite Player   5



to train on a field, a player can work on foot skills and technical ability on
a racquetball court. Gymnasiums, basements, and tennis courts are also
great places to train.
   Developing a slightly different training regimen for each type of facility
can also help to maintain a training program. For example, a basement where
space is limited is ideal for practicing fast footwork with or without the ball.
A racquetball court can help a player learn to react quickly and improve his
ability to receive the ball.
   Having the discipline and drive to develop and adhere to a training routine
helps a player improve, and it sets the foundation, establishes the standard,
and drives the team and its players to achieve progress and success.
       chapter 2


  Speed, Agility,
 and Coordination

Over the past decade, speed, agility, and coordination (SAC) training has
become an important component in the development of elite soccer players.
At all levels of the game—youth, amateur, and professional—SAC training
helps players develop or refine key physical abilities.
   SAC training generally focuses on short bursts of running, jumping, and
hopping and includes quick changes of direction; patterned footwork around
poles, cones, and ladders; and isolated technical training with a ball.
   For the youngest players, SAC training is used for macro purposes: to
help young players develop better balance, coordination, and overall body
awareness and control. The training includes all parts of the body and in-
corporates a lot of jumping, tumbling, and rolling. The goal with the young-
est players is to help them improve their body awareness. Learning how
to balance the body when jumping or hopping, as well as learning how to
fall, roll, and tumble, is crucial to developing athletic ability.
   The elite youth and professional levels use SAC training to isolate specific
aspects of the player’s physical development. By focusing on the quality,
rather than quantity, of repetition, elite coaches use SAC training to improve
running technique, balance, acceleration, foot speed, and technique in a
soccer-specific setting.


Duration and Equipment
SAC training should be done at the beginning of training sessions when
players are fresh and can focus on the quality of their performance without


                                                                                  7
8      Elite Soccer Drills


          being hindered by muscle fatigue. Also, there is less risk of soft tissue inju-
          ries when players are fresh and muscles are not fatigued. SAC training can
          also be used, to a lesser extent, as a warm-up before matches. A warm-up
          consisting of two to four SAC exercises is a dynamic way to help players
          prepare for a match.
             The most common format used in SAC training is a circuit course. Set-
          ting up five to eight stations and allowing small groups to go through each
          station for a set time, usually two to four minutes per station, allow each
          player the opportunity to get a complete SAC workout.
             Certain training equipment is helpful for setting up SAC training. The
          basics include cones, plastic rods or poles, agility rings, agility ladders, and
          hurdles. More advanced equipment, usually found at colleges and profes-
          sional clubs, includes running sleds, running parachutes, agility boxes, speed
          bands, heart rate monitors, and timing equipment. For the purposes of this
          book, we focus only on drills that are done with basic equipment. Many
          coaches who do not have access to, or the budget for, agility poles, agility
          ladders, and other equipment often find unique and inexpensive ways to
          create their own equipment—for example, using PVC piping in place of
          agility poles, or using cones or a rope to make an agility ladder.
             The following pages present SAC exercises and ideas that can be com-
          bined in a variety of ways to create circuit courses for your players. Some
          basic considerations are necessary when creating a circuit course. First, are
          you using the circuit as a warm-up, a main component of practice, or a cool-
          down? Warm-up and cool-down circuits should not be overly demanding
          physically, whereas circuits used in the middle of training sessions should
          be physically taxing.
             Next, overloading on one type of exercise, such as jumping or sprinting,
          is not recommended because it can cause players to become overly fatigued
          and injured. Having a good balance among three or four types of exercises,
          and varying the order, is a good starting point.
             Finally, consider the duration at each station, as well as the amount of
          rest between stations. Generally, spending two to three minutes per station
          is a good starting point, and one to three minutes of rest between stations
          is a good ratio.
                               Acceleration                                                   1


Purpose
Improve balance, acceleration, and speed.
Organization
Using four cones or poles, make a diamond with 1-yard
sides. Place a fifth and sixth cone 10 yards in front of
the diamond, with 5 yards between them, creating a                                    5
finish line. Groups of 5 to 10 players stand in a line
behind the southernmost cone. Each player performs
the activity and then walks to the end of the line.
Procedure
The first player starts in the center of the diamond with
his feet together. In quick succession, he jumps with       2                                      4
feet together over the cone or pole to his left, back to                     1    X       3
the center, over the cone or pole to his right, back to
the center, and then runs to the cone 10 yards in front
of him.
Key Points
  • Keep your feet together.
  • Use your arms to help balance.
  • Land on the front part of the foot.                  E4409/Matkovich/02.01a/319633/TimB/R3-alw
  • Accelerate using the front part of the foot.

Variations
  1. Players perform jumps with their backs to the finishing cone, then turn
     and run facing forward.
  2. Players hop on one foot over the left cone, back to center, over the right
     cone, back to center, and then run forward. Repeat using opposite foot.
  3. Players roll, tumble, or perform a header while running to the finishing
     line.
  4. Each player performs a technical action at the finishing line. Technical
     actions could include passing to a designated player or taking a goal
     shot.
  5. Each player receives the ball from a server (a designated player standing 10
     yards past the finish line) and performs a technical action—volley, header,
     goal shot—at the finish line, then passes the ball back to the server.




                                                    CHAPTER 2   Speed, Agility, and Coordination   9
        2                         Agility Ladder Work


        Purpose
        Improve balance, foot speed, and foot coordination.
        Organization
        Secure an agility ladder to the ground or floor. Groups of five to seven players
        form a line at one end of the ladder. Players go through the ladder performing
        specific exercises, then walk to the end of the line.
        Procedure
        The player steps to the left and just in front of the first rung of the ladder and
        goes through the ladder performing the following pattern: right foot inside, left
        foot inside, right foot outside, left foot inside, right foot inside, left foot outside,
        right foot inside, left foot inside, and so on (a).
        Key Points
          • Concentrate on the correct pattern before speed.
          • Use your arms to help balance.
          • Increase foot speed as the pattern becomes easier to perform.

        Variations
          1. Players go through the same pattern, except backward.
          2. Players jump with two feet over the rungs of the ladder.
          3. Players hop on one foot over the rungs of the ladder.
          4. Players step over, step back, jump over, and then jump and hop over rungs
             of ladder (one and two footed). The players can perform the activity facing
             forward or backward. They go through the entire ladder hopping on two
             feet, then go through hopping on the right foot only, then on the left foot
             only.
          5. Players run through the ladder, lift their knees high, and allow both feet
             to touch the ground between each rung as they go through.
          6. Players move along either side of the ladder in a right-foot-in, left-foot-in,
             right-foot-out, left-foot-out, right-foot-in, left-foot-in pattern—two in, two
             out (forward and back).
          7. Players start on the right side of the ladder and move through the ladder
             in a zigzag, right-foot-in, left-foot-in, right-foot-out, left-foot-out, right-
             foot-in, right-foot-in pattern—two in, two out (b).




10      Elite Soccer Drills
                                                                             9
                                                                        R

             8           7                                                                      R
                 L   R                                                                              7
                                                                    10
                                                               L                            L
                                                                                                8
         L
     6
                         5                                                   R
                     R
                                                                         5
                                                        R
             4 L                                    3
                                                                        L
                                                L                   6
                              R             4
                                  3
                                                                             R 1

                 L   R
             2           1
                                                                    L 2
 L       R

                                                                                                L       R

         a                                              b
E4409/Matkovich/02.02a/319638/TimB/R3-alw




                             E4409/Matkovich/02.02b/319639/TimB/R2-alwLRLRRRLLRLRLRRRLLR




                                                        CHAPTER 2       Speed, Agility, and Coordination    11
        3                            Stride Patterns


        Purpose
        Improve foot speed, foot coordination, and acceleration.
        Organization
        Place 8 to 10 agility poles parallel in a row, and increase the spacing between
        each pole gradually. The pole spacing should start at 1 foot (30 cm) and gradu-
        ally increase to 2 yards. Place a cone 2 yards behind the first pole to mark the
        starting point.
        Procedure
        Players start behind the cone. At your signal, the first player runs over the poles,
        making sure to adjust her stride length as she goes over each pole. Upon reach-
        ing the last pole, she should be running at speed, with long strides, and finish
        with a 10-yard sprint. Each player performs 5 to 10 repetitions (a).
        Key Points
          • Concentrate on organizing your feet before going for speed.
          • Use your arms to help balance.
          • Increase foot speed as the pattern becomes easier to perform.

        Variations
          1. Rather than gradually increasing the distance between the poles, vary
             the distance from short to long so the players have to speed up and slow
             down as they go over the poles.
          2. Add a technical action at the end of the sprint:
               a. Header
               b. Pass
               c. Volley
               d. Shot (b)
               e. Cross (c)
               f. Any combination of techniques




12      Elite Soccer Drills
                      X




                                        10 yards




    a




        E4409/Matkovich/02.03a/319640/TimB/R3-alw




b                                c



                                     CHAPTER 2   Speed, Agility, and Coordination   13
       4                            Agility Running 1


       Purpose
       Improve balance, foot speed, and foot coordination.
       Organization
       Place cones to form a 30-  15-yard rectangle. The cones that form the center
       slalom should be 1 yard apart.
       Procedure
       At your signal, the player at cone A runs at top speed to cone B, then back to
       the opposite side, followed by a slalom up and back through the center cones
       and then back up to cone C. The player proceeds to cone D for the finish.
       Key Points
         • Concentrate on the correct pattern before speed.
         • Use your arms to help balance.
         • Shorten your stride length when changing direction.

       Variations
         1. Increase the distances between the cones.
         2. Players run backward through the course.
         3. Players perform technical actions at any or all of points A, B, and C.
         4. Time each run and mark players’ progress.



                       B                                         C




                                                                         15 yards




                       A                                             D
                   X
                                         30 yards




                      E4409/Matkovich/02.04/319655/TimB/R3-alw
14      Elite Soccer Drills
                           Agility Running 2                                              5


Purpose
Improve balance, foot speed, and foot coordination.
Organization
Set cones in a Y formation to be used as a guide for the players. Players proceed
through the course and trace the Y cone pattern.
Procedure
At your signal, the player runs through the course as quickly as possible. The
player starts at the center cone and runs around the cone to her right, going in
a counterclockwise direction.
Key Points
  • Concentrate on the correct pattern before speed.
  • Use your arms to help balance.
  • Shorten your stride length when changing direction.

Variations
  1. Increase the distances.
  2. Players run backward through the entire course.
  3. Players run through the course facing the same direction throughout, so
     they are running backward for sections A, B, and C.
  4. Time each run and mark players’ progress.
                                                   A




                       C



                                        X



                               B




                                                 CHAPTER 2   Speed, Agility, and Coordination   15
        6                         Agility Running 3


        Purpose
        Improve balance, foot speed, and foot coordination.
        Organization
        Place six cones in an indented triangle pattern; players perform actions between
        the cones.
        Procedure
        At your signal, the player runs through the course as quickly as possible. When
        shuffling in sections B and C, the player moves sideways without letting his feet
        cross. Incorporate the actions listed in the diagram that correspond to points
        A through F.
        Key Points
          • Concentrate on the correct pattern before speed.
          • Use your arms to help balance.
          • Shorten your stride length when changing direction.

        Variations
          1. Increase the distances.
          2. Players run backward through the entire course.
          3. Time each run and mark players’ progress.




16      Elite Soccer Drills
                                                      A: Forward
                                                      B: Shuffle facing out
                                                      C: Shuffle facing in
                                                      D: Backward
                                                      E: Forward
                                                      F: Forward
         C                            B




                    10 yards




D                                                         A




               E                 F




                                                      X


    E4409/Matkovich/02.05/319656/TimB/R3 -alw




                                      CHAPTER 2   Speed, Agility, and Coordination   17
        7                         Jumping Patterns


        Purpose
        Improve balance, jumping ability, and coordination.
        Organization
        Using poles, set up four to six jumping gates, all at mid-shin height. In varia-
        tions 1 and 2, the height varies.
        Procedure
        At your signal, the player runs through the course as quickly as possible, jump-
        ing over each gate (a). The player should keep both feet together and bring
        his knees up when jumping. Players hurdle over the higher gates used in the
        variations. Players can jump over hurdles or gates with both feet together or
        one foot at a time.
        Key Points
          • Organize your feet before jumping.
          • Use your arms to help balance.
          • Shorten your stride length when approaching the gate.

        Variations
          1. Vary the height of the gates so that they get gradually higher. Random
             variation of the height is also useful.
          2. Adjust the gates’ heights alternately so that players must jump over the
             first gate, duck or roll under the second, jump over the third, duck or roll
             under the fourth, and so on (b).
          3. Time each run and mark players’ progress.
          4. Add a technical action, such as a pass or heading the ball to a designated
             player at the end of the course.
          5. Using only one gate, players touch the ball under the gate, then jump over
             the gate, collect the ball, and end with a shot on goal, a cross, or a pass.
          6. Using only one gate, for 30 seconds, players pass the ball under the gate,
             jump over the gate, collect the ball, pass the ball back under the gate in
             the reverse direction, jump over the gate, collect the ball, and repeat.




18      Elite Soccer Drills
                 X                                                 X




a                                           b


                                            E4409/Matkovich/02.07b/319659/TimB/R4-alw




E4409/Matkovich/02.07a/319658/TimB/R2-alw




                                                CHAPTER 2   Speed, Agility, and Coordination   19
        8                     Sprint Work With a Ball


        Purpose
        Improve foot speed, acceleration, and technical ability while running.
        Organization
        Mark a 20-yard line and separate it into 5-yard intervals using cones. Place one
        ball at each of the 5- and 10-yard markers. Place servers on the right and left
        of the 15-yard line.
        Procedure
        At your signal, player 1 sprints out to the 5-yard marker, collects the ball, and
        dribbles back to the starting point. She then turns and sprints out to the 10-yard
        marker and plays the ball to the receiving player 15 yards away and sprints
        back to the starting point. She then sprints out to the 15-yard marker. As player
        1 approaches the marker, server 1 plays the ball into player 1’s path, at which
        point player 1 shoots at goal and then sprints back to the starting point. Finally,
        player 1 sprints out to the 20-yard marker, turns, collects a pass from server 2,
        and dribbles back to the starting point to finish (a).
        Key Points
          • Shorten your stride when changing direction.
          • Adjust your feet in order to receive balls with a good first touch.

        Variations
          1. Increase the distances for more fitness.
          2. Server 1 throws the ball for player 1 to volley at goal.
          3. After receiving the ball from server 2, player 1 turns and dribbles to goal,
             ending with a shot (b).
          4. Each time player 1 returns to the starting point, she performs a technical
             action:
               a. Volley
               b. Header
               c. Pass
               d. Shot
          5. Time each run and mark players’ progress.




20      Elite Soccer Drills
                         X2
                                         GK




                                                                  20 yards

                                                                                   S2
             S1                               15 yards
                              10 yards



             5 yards




    X1   1               2               3                 4
a

                E4409/Matkovich/02.08a/319660/TimB/R3-alw
                        X2
                                     GK




                                                                    20 yards
                                                                                   S2
             S1                               15 yards
                              10 yards



             5 yards




    X1   1               2               3                 4
b

                  E4409/Matkovich/02.08b/321079/TimB/R3-alw




                                                   CHAPTER 2   Speed, Agility, and Coordination   21
        9                     Competitive Agility Training


        Purpose
        Improve balance, foot speed, and foot coordination.
        Organization
        Set out two sets of agility poles in a slalom pattern, side by side. Mark a finish
        line clearly with cones 10 yards past the last pole.
        Procedure
        At your signal, players 1 and 2 slalom through the agility poles, then turn and
        sprint back to the starting point, touching the line with their feet. They then
        sprint to the finish line (a).
        Key Points
          • Use quick feet through slalom poles.
          • Shorten your stride length when changing direction.

        Variations
          1. Increase the finish line distance.
          2. Players run backward through the course.
          3. Players dribble a ball across the finish line.
          4. Add a second set of agility poles, forcing players to sprint between sets
             (b).
          5. Rather than sprinting or dribbling a ball each across the finish line, the
             players race to one ball, and then attack goal, with player 1 attacking and
             player 2 defending.
          6. Time each run and mark players’ progress.




22      Elite Soccer Drills
                                                         X1                 X2
              X1           X2
     a                                       b
E4409/Matkovich/02.09a/319661/TimB/R3-alw
                                        E4409/Matkovich/02.09b/319662/TimB/R3-alw




                                                 CHAPTER 2   Speed, Agility, and Coordination   23
        10                          Agility Hurdles


        Purpose
        Improve balance, foot speed, and foot coordination.
        Organization
        Lay out 8 to 10 stand-alone agility hurdles in a row. Mark a starting point with
        a cone.
        Procedure
        At your signal, the player runs over the hurdles as quickly as possible, touching
        both feet in the space between each set of hurdles.
        Key Points
          • Concentrate on the correct pattern before speed.
          • Use your arms to help balance.
          • Raise your knees when running.
          • Move your arms in unison with your legs.

        Variations
          1. Players add a sprint at the end of the row.
          2. Players run backward through the course.
          3. Players perform a technical action at the end of the row:
                a. Volley
                b. Shot
                c. Pass
                d. Cross
                e. Dribble
                f. Header
          4. Players hop or jump over hurdles, rather than running:
                a. With both feet together
                b. Left foot only
                c. Right foot only
                d. With both feet together, raising knees as high as possible
          5. Players run over hurdles sideways, touching both feet in the space between
             each set of hurdles.
                a. Lead with right side.
                b. Lead with left side.
          6. Lay hurdles out in a random direction. Players must face the same direc-
             tion while hopping over each hurdle.
          7. Time each run and mark players’ progress.



24      Elite Soccer Drills
                 X




E4409/Matkovich/02.10a/319663/TimB/R3-alw




                            CHAPTER 2   Speed, Agility, and Coordination   25
        11                      Star Agility Station


        Purpose
        Improve balance, foot speed, and foot coordination.
        Organization
        Place cones in a cross formation, with each outer cone 10 yards from the center
        cone (a).
        Procedure
        At your signal, the player does the following:
            1. Sprints forward to center
            2. Shuffles to the right
            3. Shuffles back to center
            4. Sprints forward
            5. Sprints backward to center
            6. Shuffles to the left
            7. Shuffles back to center
            8. Sprints backward to the end

        Key Points
          • Use your arms to help balance.
          • Shorten your stride length when changing direction.

        Variations
          1. Increase the distances.
          2. Players perform technical actions at various points.
               a. Volley
               b. Pass
               c. Header
          3. Add cones A, B, C, and D. Players complete the eight actions listed above
             and sprint forward out and backward back at the additional cones as well
             (b).
          4. Time each run and mark players’ progress.




26      Elite Soccer Drills
                                          10 yards




                       5            4
                                                            10 yards




      6                                           3



      7                                           2




                       8            1                       10 yards




a                               X


    E4409/Matkovich/02.11a/319665/TimB/R2-alw
                   C                                                          B




                   D                                                          A



            b                                         X


                           E4409/Matkovich/02.11b/319666/TimB/R2-alw
                                            CHAPTER 2 Speed, Agility, and Coordination   27
        chapter 3


                      Juggling


You don’t often see a player in a high-level match collect a ball and juggle it
down the field past opponents. However, the ability to juggle the ball has a
direct correlation to the ability to control the ball. Therefore, it is vital to play-
ers’ development that they make juggling a part of their training routines.
   Juggling instills a sense of discipline and work ethic in players. Only
through repetition and practice will players see improvement. At first, jug-
gling is not easy, and it is frustrating. But with a commitment to improv-
ing, players can improve their juggling ability and their ability to control
the ball.
   Juggling also gives players a sense of how to use nearly every part of the
body to control and manipulate the ball. The chest, knees, thighs, shoulders,
shins, feet, heels, and back are all in play when juggling. Generally, players
are most comfortable learning to juggle with their thighs, likely because
they have the most surface area to strike the ball. However, it is highly rec-
ommended that players learn to juggle with their feet first. Although this
is initially more difficult, improving timing and touch with the feet is the
foundation for improvement.
   In addition to improving players’ feel for the ball, juggling improves
timing and overall coordination in relation to the ball. Because players are
constantly adjusting to the height and spin of the ball, footwork and balance
improve naturally. Striking the ball at different heights varies not only the
degree of difficulty in keeping the ball in the air but also the degree of dif-
ficulty in maintaining balance. Learning muscle group control is essential
as players move through the higher levels of the game. The better control
players have, the less energy they expend when in possession of the ball.
   The number of juggling variations is virtually limitless. The following
pages provide a variety of juggling activities that will improve players’
juggling ability, ball control, footwork, balance, body control, and overall
coordination.


                                                                                         29
        12                          Keep-Away (5v2)


        Purpose
        Improve the overall ability to control flighted balls.
        Organization
        Groups of 7 to 10 players form a small circle with 2 players holding colored
        training bibs in the middle, to indentify them as defenders.
        Procedure
        Player 1 serves the ball with the hands to player 2, who must juggle the ball,
        then pass it in the air to another player, without the two defending players (D1
        and D2) in the middle stealing the ball (a).
          If one of the defending players intercepts or touches the ball, or the ball hits
        the ground, the player who made the pass or dropped the ball replaces the
        defender who has been in the center the longest.
          Defenders can steal the ball only when it is being passed between players.
        Key Points
          • Choose a controlling surface early.
          • Judge the spin and pace of the pass early.
          • Don’t pass the ball until you are balanced.

        Variations
          1. Players allow the ball to bounce once between passes or touches.
          2. Defenders must walk in the middle to make it slightly easier for the play-
             ers on the outside of the circle to pass the ball to each other.
          3. Limit the number of touches the outside players are allowed to take.
          4. Do not allow headers.
          5. Have players use one defender rather than two (b).




30      Elite Soccer Drills
                                      X1

               1


                                  2

                                                             X3

    X2                 D1

                                                                            10 yards
                                           D2

                                                         5
     X4


                                          X5
                   4




a                               10 yards



                            E4409/Matkovich/03.01a/319667/TimB/R3-alw


                                           X1

          X4


                                                             X2
                                      D
                                                                             10 yards
    X3




     X5

b                                         X6




                                                                        CHAPTER 3   Juggling   31
        13           Individual Juggling: Around the World


        Purpose
        Improve the overall ability to control flighted balls.
        Organization
        One to 20 players, each with a ball and enough space to juggle the ball.
        Procedure
        At your signal, each player attempts to juggle the ball in the Around the World
        sequence: right foot, right thigh, right shoulder, head, left shoulder, left thigh,
        left foot, left thigh, left shoulder, head, right shoulder, right thigh, right foot
        (a-c). There is no time limit for beginners. For more advanced players, time
        limits can be used.
        Key Points
          • Judge the spin and pace of the ball early to decide how soft or hard to
            touch the ball as it comes down.
          • Touch the ball high enough to get underneath it for the next touch.

        Variations
          1. Allow players to take as many touches as they like at each point in the
             sequence.
          2. Players can catch the ball on the backs of their necks for a rest at the half-
             way point (pick a country).




32      Elite Soccer Drills
    a




b       c




            CHAPTER 3   Juggling   33
        14 Individual Juggling: Pattern & Sequence


        Purpose
        Improve the overall ability to control flighted balls.
        Organization
        One to 20 players, each with a ball and enough space to juggle the ball.
        Procedure
        At your signal, each player attempts to juggle the ball in a low-low-high, low-
        low-high sequence using any part of the body. Low and high refer to the height
        the ball is kicked or hit in the air after the player touches it. The greater the
        height, the more difficult the ball is to control. No time limit or penalties.
        Key Points
          • Judge the spin and pace of the ball early.
          • Stay balanced.
          • Test yourself by hitting the high ball a bit higher each time.

        Variations
          1. Allow players to bounce the ball between touches.
          2. Here are other patterns:
               a. Right, left, right, left
               b. Foot, foot, thigh, thigh, head, head, foot, foot
               c. Right (once), left (once), right (twice), left (twice), right (three times),
                  left (three times)
               d. Right foot or side only
               e. Left foot or side only




34      Elite Soccer Drills
	Individual Juggling: Speed Juggling                                            15


Purpose
Improve the overall ability to control flighted balls.
Organization
One to 20 players, each with a ball and enough space to juggle the ball.
Procedure
Set a timer for 30 seconds. On your signal, the players juggle as many times as
possible in 30 seconds. Players who drop their balls should lift them again and
continue counting.
Key Points
  • Keep the ball as low as possible.
  • Use the feet as much as possible.
  • Judge the spin and pace of the ball early.
  • Stay balanced.

Variations
  1. Restrict which body parts players can use.
  2. Increase the time (60 seconds).
  3. If they drop the ball, players must start from zero again.
  4. Players can use headers only.




                                                                  CHAPTER 3   Juggling   35
        16                      Two-Player Juggling


        Purpose
        Improve the overall ability to control flighted balls.
                                                                    4        5
        Organization
        One to 20 players, in pairs, with one ball per pair.            X1
        Procedure
                                                                   6             3
        Player 1 begins juggling while player 2 jogs back-
        ward 5 yards, then forward 5 yards to the starting
                                                                        X2
        point. Player 1 passes the ball in the air to player 2,
        who juggles while player 1 jogs backward and then
        forward. The players continue the pattern for a set         1        2       5 yards
        time (a).
        Key Points
          • Judge the spin and pace of the ball early.                               a
          • Pass the ball to your partner with enough height
            that he can get underneath the ball (b).E4409/Matkovich/03.04a/319670/TimB/R2-alw



            b




36      Elite Soccer Drills
                                  4              5
                                        X1


                                 6               3


                                  2     X2       1


                                      10 yards


                      c
                   E4409/Matkovich/03.04b/319671/TimB/R5-alw



Variations
  1. Restrict the number of touches each player can take when juggling.
  2. Restrict or limit the parts of the body players can use.
  3. Player 2 shuffles side to side 5 yards and then receives the ball (c).
  4. Player 2 jogs around player 1 while he is juggling. Player 1 passes the ball
     when player 2 gets back in front of him.
  5. Players stand 5 yards apart, facing each other. After a set number of
     touches, player 1 pops the ball up in the air over player 2’s head. Player
     2 then turns and receives or continues juggling the ball back to player 1
     and pops it over player 1’s head for him to retrieve. The players continue
     the pattern for a set time.
  6. Players 1 and 2 pass the ball back and forth, increasing the number of
     touches by one with each pass. For example: Player 1 serves, and with
     one touch player 2 touches the ball back to player 1. Player 1 receives
     the ball and touches it twice, passing it back to player 2 with the second
     touch. Player 2 takes three touches, passing it back to player 1 with the
     third touch. Player 1 takes four touches, passing it back to player 2 with
     the fourth touch, and so on.




                                                                 CHAPTER 3   Juggling   37
        17                           Group Juggling


        Purpose
        Improve the overall ability to control flighted balls.
        Organization
        Groups of four players with one ball, separated by 10 yards into two lines of
        two players.
        Procedure
        Player 1 moves across to player 2 while juggling the ball. When she reaches
        player 2, she passes the ball in the air to player 2, who then juggles across to
        player 3, who receives the ball and will continue the pattern to player 4 (a). All
        passes should be made in the air. If the ball hits the ground, players should try to
        pass the ball off of the bounce, and not let the ball settle on the ground. Player 4
        then returns the ball to player 1, starting the sequence again. The players repeat
        the pattern for a set time.
        Key Points
          • Move slowly across the line.
          • Limit the spin from each touch.
          • Serve the ball to the next player with enough height that she can take a
            good first touch.

        Variations
          1. Allow the ball to bounce between touches.
          2. Player 1 serves the ball in the air to player 2, who controls or juggles the
             ball and then serves it in the air to player 3, who is standing behind player
             1. Player 1 follows his pass across the line, switching to the other side. The
             players repeat the pattern for a set time (b).
          3. Player 1 juggles the ball across. At the halfway point he plays the ball, in
             the air, to player 2, who plays it back to player 1 with one touch. Player
             1 plays it back to player 2 with one touch, and player 2 juggles across to
             player 3 and repeats the passing pattern.




38      Elite Soccer Drills
                      X3
                    X1
                                  4
                    1
         Juggling



                                          10 yards

                                  Juggling
                2             3

                        X2
                        X4
  a



E4409/Matkovich/03.05a/319673/TimB/R3-alw
                         X3
                        X1



                                      2

               1




                        X2
  b


 E4409/Matkovich/03.05b/319674/TimB/R2-alw




                                                     CHAPTER 3   Juggling   39
        18                      Group Juggling Relay


        Purpose
        Improve the overall ability to control flighted balls.
        Organization
        Groups of four to six players, with one ball per group. Players stand in a line
        with the ball at the first player’s feet. Place a cone 10 yards in front of the line.
        Procedure
        At your signal, player 1 juggles the ball out to the cone, turns, and passes the
        ball, in the air, back to player 2. Player 1 stays by the cone to be the receiver
        for the other players. The other players stay in line and do not run forward.
        Player 2 controls or juggles the ball, passes it back to player 1, and then goes
        to the end of the line. Player 1 controls or juggles the ball and passes it, in the
        air, to player 3, who controls it, plays it back to player 1, and goes to the end of
        the line. Players continue the pattern until player 2 receives the ball again. He
        then replaces player 1 at the cone, and the pattern is repeated until all players
        have been at the cone.
        Key Points                                                       X4
          • Judge the spin and pace of the ball early.                    X3
                                                                                4
          • Choose a controlling surface early.                           X2
          • Pass the ball across only when you are                       X1
            balanced and have had a good prepara-
            tory touch.                                                         3
                                                                  1
        Variations                                                         2
          1. Allow the ball to bounce between
                                                                                    10 yards
             touches.
          2. Restrict the parts of the body the players
             can use (e.g., feet only).
          3. Increase or decrease the distance between
             the line and the cone based on the ability
             level of the players.


                                                    E4409/Matkovich/03.06/319675/TimB/R3-alw




40      Elite Soccer Drills
               Group Juggling: Elimination                                       19


Purpose
Improve the overall ability to control flighted balls.
Organization
Groups of three to seven players, with one ball per group.
Procedure
Player 1 serves the ball with her hands to player 2 and calls out a number between
1 and 5 while the ball is in the air. This is the number of touches player 2 should
make in her juggling. Player 2 must control, juggle, and pass the ball to player 3
without letting it touch the ground. Player 3 repeats the pattern and moves the
ball to player 4. If the ball is dropped or an unplayable pass is given, the player
who dropped the ball or made the unplayable pass is eliminated. Eliminated
players juggle on their own while the game finishes.
Key Points                                                                                X4
                                                         X1
  • Judge the spin and pace
                                                                                    3
    of the ball early.
  • Choose a controlling sur-
    face early.

Variations
  1. Players serve with their
                                                1
     hands.
  2. Players serve with their
     feet—from a volley.                                                  X3
  3. Players serve with their                            2
     feet—from the ground.
  4. Restrict the use of body
                                    X2
     parts (e.g., no headers).
  5. Play HORSE or SOCCER. When a player drops the ball, or gives an unplay-
     able pass, she gets a letter. A player is eliminated when the word HORSE
     or SOCCER is spelled. Eliminated players juggle on their own while the
     game finishes.
                               E4409/Matkovich/03.07/319676/TimB/R3-alw




                                                                   CHAPTER 3   Juggling        41
       chapter 4


                   Dribbling

Without question, dribbling is a key skill if a player is to succeed at the very
highest level of the game. Though considered a basic skill, dribbling is the
most dynamic and exciting component in the game.
   Many think of dribbling as simply running with the ball. However, at
the highest level of the game, dribbling is more than that; it is the ability to
manipulate, control, and move the ball to gain or maintain an advantage.
The best players in the world tend to use dribbling for three basic purposes:
to beat or eliminate defenders by running past them with the ball, to create
new passing lanes and angles, and to maintain possession and control of
the ball. Players who use dribbling to good advantage to accomplish one or
more of these purposes are often referred to as “having good feet.”
   Examples of players who use dribbling successfully to accomplish these
three purposes are not difficult to find in today’s game. Lionel Messi of
Argentina and Brazil’s Ronaldinho are two obvious examples of players
who use dribbling moves to beat and eliminate defenders in order to create
an advantage for their teams. The ability to combine dribbling, feints, and
changes of pace makes these players two of the most creative, dynamic, and
explosive attacking players in the world.
   Speed dribbling is also used to eliminate defenders and to gain territory
when attacking. Manchester United’s Cristiano Ronaldo and Real Madrid’s
Arjen Robben are two of the best examples in soccer today of players who
use dribbling at speed to create attacking advantages for their teams. The
best speed dribblers have the ability to keep close control of the ball when
running at close to top speed. By moving not only their bodies, but the ball
as well, at a rapid rate, Ronaldo and Robben are able to unbalance their op-
ponents and create space to run into.
   Creating passing angles is crucial to creating scoring chances, and through
creative and intelligent dribbling, players can create those angles. Often,
moving the ball as little as two or three yards can create various attacking
and possession options. Although many observers associate space, time, and
speed with the option to dribble, the ability to manipulate and move the ball

                                                                                   43
44      Elite Soccer Drills


        in a tight, pressurized space is dribbling in perhaps its most potent form.
           Using a slight feint when a defender is approaching is a great way to
        cause the defender to slow down, lose balance, or both. Accelerating with
        the ball is an effective way to get away from a defender when there is open
        space behind the defender. In this situation, the attacking player can afford
        to have the ball farther from his body, allow him to touch the ball ahead and
        sprint to catch up to the ball.
           French legend Zinedine Zidane and AC Milan and Brazilian attacking
        midfielder Kaká are two of the best exponents of dribbling with the ball in
        a tight area to create passing lanes. Zidane, in particular, had the unique
        ability to use a wide range of touches on the ball to move defenders into
        vulnerable positions and then exploit them with lethal passes. Using a vari-
        ety of foot surfaces can help a player move the ball into a position in which
        the defender thinks she can steal it, baiting the defender into attempting
        the steal; the player then quickly moves the ball away from the defender
        and into open space.
           Dribbling to beat players and to create passing angles requires players to
        actually move the ball in and out of pressure in order to maintain posses-
        sion for their teams. By dribbling the ball sideways or backward, players
        can create time and space while reducing the amount of pressure placed on
        them by the opposing team.
           All players, no matter their defensive or offensive positions, can use the
        skill of dribbling to work their way out of pressurized situations. For ex-
        ample, target forwards use dribbling under pressure to hold the ball in order
        to create time for their teammates to join the attack.
           Although players use most, or almost all, of their body parts when drib-
        bling, the feet are obviously the part most used. Many coaches in soccer
        today work on the principle that six surfaces of the foot are used when
        training to improve dribbling:
          1. Top of the foot
          2. Sole of the foot
          3. Toe
          4. Inside of the foot
          5. Outside of the foot
          6. Heel
           Although that view is not wrong, it is far too simplistic and compart-
        mentalized. When training players at or near the highest levels of the game,
        coaches should adopt the mind-set that effective dribbling requires the use
        of the whole foot and that every part of the dribbling foot can be used to
        the player’s advantage.
           The activities in this chapter isolate or combine the following dribbling
        objectives:
          • Beat or eliminate defenders by running at and past them with ball.
          • Create new passing lanes and angles.
          • Maintain possession and control of the ball.
20                           Slalom Dribbling


Purpose
Improve overall ball control when dribbling, and improve foot speed and
coordination.
Organization
Place 10 flags or cones in a line with 1 yard between each.
Procedure
Players move with the ball around the poles performing various dribbling
patterns.
Key Point
The feet should be moving quickly, while the ball moves at
a slower pace. You have to reorganize your feet while the
ball is moving, so your feet are actually moving faster than
the ball is rolling.
Variations
  1. Players slalom around the poles using any part of both
     feet.
  2. Players use right foot only.
  3. Players use left foot only.
  4. Players use both feet, inside only.
  5. Players use both feet, outside only.
  6. Pattern 1: Players dribble around the first pole with
     the inside of the right foot, stop the ball with the sole
     of the right foot, dribble around the next pole with the
     inside of the left foot, stop the ball with the sole of the
     left foot, and repeat. (Inside right, stop, inside left, stop,
     inside right, stop.)
  7. Pattern 2: Players rake around the poles with inside of
     the right foot, stop with outside of the right foot, rake
     through the next poles with inside of the left foot, stop
     with outside of the left foot, repeat (rake, stop, rake,                X
     stop, rake, stop).


                                                        E4409/Matkovich/04.02/319678/TimB/R2-alw




                                                                      CHAPTER 4   Dribbling   45
        21                                Two Lines


        Purpose
        Improve the ability to dribble to beat an opponent, and maintain overall ball
        control.
        Organization
        Create two lines, with three to six players in each line. Lines are 15 to 20 yards
        apart, with one flag or cone in the middle. For more repetitions, have several
        groups working at the same time.
        Procedure
        The first player from each line dribbles slowly toward the flag, then changes
        pace and accelerates to the opposite line.
        Key Points
          • Keep the ball close when dribbling slowly; then take a big touch to accel-
            erate.
          • Use the outside of the foot when preparing the ball for the bigger, accel-
            erating touch.
          • Keep the ball on the outside of your body when dribbling.
          • Alternate feet.

        Variations
          1. Players switch the ball in the middle, then accelerate.
          2. Inside-outside fake: Players slowly drag the ball across the body with the
             inside of the foot to unbalance their opponents, then quickly accelerate
             with an outside-of-the-foot touch to go past the opponent.
          3. Double fake: Players slowly drag the ball across the body with the inside
             of the right foot, then, rather than taking the ball with the outside of the
             right foot, they step past the ball with the right foot and take it away with
             the outside of the left foot.
          4. Inside-out step-over: Players bring the right foot around the back and
             inside of the ball, then take the ball away to the left, using the outside of
             the left foot.
          5. Double step-over: Players bring the right foot around the back and inside
             of the ball, then, rather than taking it away with the outside of the left
             foot, they step over the back and inside of the ball with the left foot and
             take it away to the right with the outside of the right foot.




46      Elite Soccer Drills
6. Outside-in step-over: With the right foot, players step around the outside
   and front of the ball, with the right foot landing on the inside of the ball.
   Then they take the ball away with the outside of the right foot.
7. Ronaldo rake: With the inside of the right foot, players rake (roll) the ball
   across the body, step over the outside and front of the ball with the left
   foot, and then take ball away to the left with the outside of the left foot.




                                     X
                                     X
                                     X
                                    X




                                          X

                                      X
                                      X
                                      X




                 E4409/Matkovich/04.01/319677/TimB/R4-alw




                                                               CHAPTER 4   Dribbling   47
        22                         Retreat Dribbling


        Purpose
        Improve the ability to turn and dribble away from pressure, and improve overall
        ball control.
        Organization
        Place four cones 20 yards apart in the form of a cross, with one flag in the center.
        Two players stand in a line outside each cone. Each player has a ball.
        Procedure
        The first player from each line dribbles to the center flag, turns using an out-
        side-of-the-foot chop, and dribbles back to the starting cone. To perform the
        outside-of-the-foot chop, the player pushes the ball out in front of him, moves
        to retrieve it, and then uses the outside of his foot to cut the ball back toward
        the direction it came from.
        Key Points
          • Keep the ball close to the foot when performing the chop; then take a big
            touch with the outside of the foot to accelerate away.
          • Perform using both feet.

        Variations
          1. Players use an inside-of-the-foot chop.
          2. Players dribble out to the cone, stop the ball with the sole of the foot, step
             past the ball, and turn back toward the starting cone, taking a big touch
             to accelerate away.
          3. To turn, players step over outside and in front of the ball with one foot,
             then spin back toward the ball, pivoting on that same foot, and take a
             touch toward the starting cone with the inside of the opposite foot.
          4. Cruyff turn: After running slightly past the ball, players use the inside of
             one foot to chop the ball behind the heel of the opposite foot, then use the
             outside of the opposite foot to take a touch and accelerate away.




48      Elite Soccer Drills
                               X
                         X




X                                                      X
                                                               20 yards
    X
                                                           X




                              X
                          X

                         20 yards


        E4409/Matkovich/04.03/319679/TimB/R3-alw




                                                   CHAPTER 4    Dribbling   49
        23                    Changing the Dribbling Angle


        Purpose
        Improve the ability to turn and dribble away from pressure by changing the
        dribbling angle, and improve overall ball control.
        Organization
        Place four cones 20 yards apart in the form of a cross, with one cone in the center
        (a). Two players stand in a line outside of each cone. Each player has a ball.
        Procedure
        The first player from each line dribbles to the center flag, changes the dribbling
        angle by stopping the ball with the sole of one foot, and pulls it back toward the
        body with the sole of that foot. The player then pushes the ball with the outside
        of the same foot toward the cone to the right.
        Key Points
          • Fake a shot before stopping the ball.
          • The foot should not stop touching the ball between the stop, pull, and push.
          • Perform using both feet.

        Variations
          1. Players lift the ball slightly with the outside of the foot when pushing it away.
          2. Players stop, pull back, and push the ball toward the cone across the body
             with the inside of the foot.
          3. Players spin away from, then move toward, the next cone using the inside
             of one foot (b).
          4. Players spin away from, then move toward, the next cone using the outside
             of the foot.
          5. Players use the outside-in step-over to get to the next cone.




50      Elite Soccer Drills
                                            X
                                        X




    X                                                               X
                                                                            20 yards
            X                                                           X




                                            X
                                        X
a
                                     20 yards



                                        X
                    E4409/Matkovich/04.04a/319680/TimB/R3-alw
                                        X




                                                                X       X
        X       X




                                            X
b                                           X



                    E4409/Matkovich/04.04b/321081/TimB/R4-alw
                                                                CHAPTER 4        Dribbling   51
        24                    Competitive 1v1 Dribbling 1


        Purpose
        Improve the ability to take on and get past an opponent, and improve overall
        ball control.
        Organization
        Place four cones 20 yards apart in the form of a cross. Create two lines of players
        at cones A and D. The line at cone A starts with the ball.
        Procedure
        Player 1 serves the ball across the diamond to player 2. Player 1 becomes the
        defender, and player 2 is the attacker. Player 2 tries to beat player 1 to any of
        the cones.
          Cone A = 0 points
          Cones B and C = 1 point
          Cone D = 5 points
          Defenders get one point for stealing or clearing the ball away.

        Key Points
          • Vary the speed in which you attack the defender.
          • Dribble at an angle to create space for yourself.
          • Change your pace after the defender is off balance.
          • Retreat to cone A if you are unable to dribble past the defender, rather
            than concede possession.

        Variations
          1. Players play 2v1 to create more space, through passing, to dribble at the
             defenders. The attacking player can also use dribbling to get the defender
             to commit, thus freeing up the other attacking player for a pass.
          2. Vary the type of service (weight, ground, bouncing, flighted) so that the
             attacking player has to control the ball quickly to dribble at the defender.
             This helps to create matchlike conditions, because players do not always
             receive the ball on the ground in a match.
          3. Award 2 points for being able to pass to the next person at cone D.




52      Elite Soccer Drills
                            X
                            X
                      X1        A




B                                              C

                                                   20 yards




                       X2       D
                            X
                            X

                    20 yards




    E4409/Matkovich/04.05/319681/TimB/R2-alw




                                               CHAPTER 4      Dribbling   53
        25                    Competitive 1v1 Dribbling 2


        Purpose
        Improve the ability to take on and get past an opponent, and improve overall
        ball control.
        Organization
        Mark a 10-  20-yard grid with cones or poles and place two small gates or
        goals at one end line.
        Procedure
        Player 1 serves the ball across the grid to player 2. Player 1 becomes the defender,
        and player 2 is the attacker. Player 2 tries to beat player 1 and dribble through
        either of the gates on the end line. The attacker gets 1 point for getting through
        the gates.
        Key Points
          • Vary the speed at which you                                 X
            attack the defender.                                        X
          • Dribble at an angle to create space                        X1
            for yourself.
          • Change your pace after the
            defender is off balance.
          • Retreat when necessary to create
            space to run at the defender.

        Variations
          1. Attacking players use the entire
             end line, rather than two gates, to
                                                                                        20 yards
             dribble across.
          2. Using the gates, award a point
             for being able to pass the ball
             through either gate.
          3. Set up additional gates on either
             sideline, close to one end line, and
             award points for being able to get
             through those gates.
          4. Set up counter goals for the de-
             fender to attack if he steals the ball.                   X2
          5. Players play 2v1 or 2v2 to create                          X
             more variation and tactical situa-
                                                                        X
             tions, which creates more passing
                                                                    10 yards
             and dribbling options.

                                                       E4409/Matkovich/04.06/319682/TimB/R3-alw



54      Elite Soccer Drills
                 1v1 Dribbling for Possession                                     26


Purpose
Improve the ability to shield the ball from an opponent, and use open space to
dribble away from pressure.
Organization
Mark a 20-  30-yard grid (the size of the grid can vary based on the number
of players). Players are in pairs, with one ball between them.
Procedure
On your signal, player 1 tries to retain possession of the ball while player 2 tries
to steal it (like a game of Keep-Away). Players immediately switch roles if the
ball is stolen or knocked out of bounds. Players play for 30-second bouts. The
number of pairs is unlimited, and is based on the number of players training.
After each bout, players should find a new partner. The number of total bouts
should be between 5 and 10, with 30 seconds of rest between each bout.
Key Points
  • Use your body to shield the ball.
  • Keep the ball as far from defending as possible when shielding.
  • Change your pace and dribble into open space to move away from pres-
    sure.

Variations
  1. Players play one-minute bouts.
  2. Make the grid larger to encourage dribbling into open space.
  3. Make the grid smaller to force players to shield the ball more often.




                                                                   CHAPTER 4   Dribbling   55
        27                    Competitive Dribbling Games


        Purpose
        Improve overall dribbling ability.
        Organization
        Mark a 20-  40-yard grid, including 5-yard-wide end zones running the length
        of each 40-yard sideline. (The grid size can vary based on the number of play-
        ers.)
        Procedure
        Players play 4v4 (or higher with more players). Goals are scored by dribbling
        across the end line (a).
        Key Points
          • Choose the right moment to dribble to beat a player rather than dribbling
            to retain possession.
          • Look for moments when there is a 1v1 matchup to dribble past an opponent.
          • Change your pace to move past defenders.

        Variations
          1. Add one or two neutral, or plus, players to create more dribbling oppor-
             tunities (b).
          2. Use three or four small gates, as shown in b, rather than the entire end
             line for players to dribble through.




56      Elite Soccer Drills
                           40 yards


                          End
                          40   Zone
                             yards

                            X
                          End Zone
                  O
        X                  X                    X                    20 yards
                            X               O
               O
               O
    X                               O           X                   20 yards
                           X            O
              O            End Zone
                             O

                          End Zone
a




                      40 yards
            E4409/Matkovich/04.08a/319684/TimB/R2-alw


        E4409/Matkovich/04.08a/319684/TimB/R2-alw

                                X
                  O                         O

    X                 N                 N           X               20 yards

                  O                         O
                                X



b




                   E4409/Matkovich/04.08b/319685/TimB/R2-alw




                                                        CHAPTER 4   Dribbling   57
        28 Competitive Dribbling Games: Possession


        Purpose
        Improve overall dribbling ability.
        Organization
        Mark a 20-  40-yard grid. (The grid size can vary based on the number of
        players.)
        Procedure
        Players play 4v4 (plus two neutral players). Players must take a minimum
        of three touches before passing to a teammate. A point is earned after seven
        passes.
        Key Points
          • Dribble into open space to move away from pressure.
          • Shield the ball from a defender when necessary.
          • Use fakes to create time on the ball and to open passing angles.

        Variations
          1. Make the grid larger to help players retain possession.
          2. Increase or decrease the minimum number of touches.
          3. Allow neutral players to play without touch restrictions.


                                               40 yards



                                          O                   X


                              X                  N        O       O

                                                                             20 yards
                                                          N
                                      X                               X
                                                     O




58      Elite Soccer Drills
                                  E4409/Matkovich/04.09/319686/TimB/R4-alw
	Dribbling to Goal                                                                        29


Purpose
Improve the ability to run at speed with the ball.
Organization
Mark a 44-  60-yard field with regular goals. (The field size can vary based
on the number of players.)
Procedure
Players play 7v7 (or lower or higher if necessary) to goal. Each player matches
up with a player on the opposite team and can steal the ball only from that
player. Players can steal the ball from anyone when it is being passed from
player to player.
Key Points
  • Have an attacking attitude. Look to dribble each time you have possession
    of the ball.
  • Run with the ball at speed.
  • Shield the ball from a defender
    when necessary.
  • Use fakes to create time on the
    ball and to move past defend-
    ers.                                       X            X
                                                     1      O7           2
Variations                                                X3
  1. Keep track of points between
                                           X6
     both individual pairs and the
                                                                                  X5
     two teams.
  2. Use teams of four, with each                                   X4
                                                                                       60 yards
     team matched up with another.
     This will encourage players to                  O4
     draw players toward them by                               X7            O5
     dribbling and then use a pass
                                            O6
     when a player is free.                                O3


                                                     O1              O2




                                                          44 yards




                                                                CHAPTER 4 Dribbling
                                E4409/Matkovich/04.10/319687/TimB/R3-alw                          59
        30                             The Gauntlet


        Purpose                                                     10 yards
        Improve overall dribbling ability.
        Organization
                                                                      D5               5 yards
        Create a 10-  45-yard grid separated into
        nine 5-yard sections with cones or poles.
        One defender is in every other 5-yard
        section. Sections without defenders are
        neutral areas. Defenders cannot leave their
        sections.
        Procedure
                                                                      D4
        An attacker tries to dribble from one end
        of the grid to the other. If the attacker has
        the ball stolen, she takes the place of the
        defender who stole the ball, and the origi-
        nal defender joins the attacking line.
        Key Points
          • Unbalance the defender with a fake.
                                                                      D3
          • Change your pace to move past the
            defender.
          • Shield the ball from a defender when
            necessary.

        Variations
          1. Make the grid larger to help players
             retain possession.                                       D2
          2. Allow players to pass the ball into
             the next neutral zone to move past
             the defender.                                      L




                                                                      D1


                                                                           A
                                                                               A   A




                                                    E4409/Matkovich/04.11/319688/TimB/R3-alw




60      Elite Soccer Drills
        chapter 5


             Passing and
              Receiving

The best teams in the world all have one thing in common: ball movement.
At the club level, Barcelona, Real Madrid, Manchester United, Arsenal,
Lyon, Ajax, and Bayern Munich circulate the ball quickly. At the interna-
tional level, Brazil, Argentina, Italy, France, Spain, and Germany do as well.
Those teams are the most fun to watch because of how they pass the ball
around the field, and the rhythm their passing develops. Yes, they have
great individual players, but how they play and pass the ball as a team is
what makes them great.
   Ball movement, at all levels, comes down to the ability to pass and receive
the ball properly. If a player cannot control (receive) a pass from a team-
mate properly, or if a player cannot pass the ball properly, the entire game
breaks down.
   Being able to put the proper weight, pace, spin, and disguise on a pass,
as well as getting the angle and accuracy of the pass correct, is essential for
players who aspire to the highest levels, or those who simply aspire to the
next level in their careers.
   Along with the ability to play a pass properly, the ability to receive or
control a pass correctly is crucial to a player’s success.
   Players must have many things, including speed, strength, and dribbling
ability, to make it to the highest levels. However, the ability to function within
a team at the top levels centers on a player’s ability to perform the most basic
elements: passing and receiving. At all levels of the game—youth, collegiate,
professional, and international soccer—the best teams all are made up of
players who are proficient in all forms of passing and receiving.




                                                                                     61
62      Elite Soccer Drills


           Why are passing and receiving so important? The simple answer is that
        they allow a team to retain possession of the ball during the game. With
        possession, a team creates scoring opportunities by quickly circulating the
        ball throughout the team, developing a rhythm, and moving the defending
        team out of position.
           The more detailed answer to why passing and receiving are so impor-
        tant is that they provide players with time and space during a game. Many
        top coaches use the phrase passing time on to refer to effective passing. Es-
        sentially, the faster the ball moves to a teammate during passing, the more
        time that teammate will have on the ball before being closed down by a
        defender. With more time on the ball, players can make better decisions
        for their teams, because they do not have to deal with immediate pressure
        from the opposing team.
           Players also can create more time for themselves by controlling the ball.
        If a player’s first touch takes the ball exactly where she wants it to go, she
        has one fewer thing to worry about when deciding where to go next with
        the ball.
           Finally, efficient passing and receiving allow players and teams to circu-
        late the ball quickly around the field. The more quickly a team can move
        the ball, the more dangerous the team is when attacking.
           The activities in this chapter will help players become more proficient
        when passing and receiving the ball. All are designed so that players must
        focus on the weight, pace, spin, angle, and accuracy of the pass, as well as
        receiving the ball with accuracy and from the best direction.
                                             8v2                                         31


Purpose
Improve passing and receiving ability.
Organization
Create groups of 7 to 10 players. Players form a 20-yard circle, with two defend-
ers in the center.
Procedure
Outside players stay connected by holding a bib between each player. Playing
two-touch, outside players try to keep the ball away from the two defending
players. When defending players touch or steal the ball, the player who turned
the ball over replaces the defending player who has been in the longest. If outside
players connect 10 or more passes in a row or split the two defending players
with a pass, the two defending players stay for another round.
Key Points
  • Take the first touch away from pressure.
  • Zip the ball across when passing (pass time on).
  • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

Variations
  1. Players play one-touch.
  2. Outside players do not hold bibs.



                                                     X
                                     X
                                         1

                                                                X

                   X                         D
                                             4
                                                 D
                           2
                                                                    X

                       X
                                 3


                                                         X
                                         X




                               E4409/Matkovich/05.08/319702/TimB/R3-alw
                                                              CHAPTER 5   Passing and Receiving   63
        32                                Two Lines


        Purpose
        Improve short passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Create two groups of four to eight players. Players form two lines 10 to 15
        yards apart.
        Procedure
        Player 1 passes the ball across to player 2 and follows the pass. In two touches,
        player 2 controls and passes the ball across to player 3, follows the pass, and
        so on (a).
        Key Points
          • Zip the ball across when passing (pass time on).
          • Take a good first touch to prepare the ball for the pass.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. Players take only one touch at each end.
          2. Players double-pass at each end.
          3. After receiving, players dribble halfway across and then pass while on
             the run.
          4. Increase the distance so that the passes are flighted and players must
             receive balls out of the air.
          5. Player 2 checks to center to receive the ball from player 1. After receiving
             the ball, player 2 turns away from player 1, who has followed his pass.
             Player 2 passes the ball into the path of player 1, focusing on the proper
             weight of the pass. Player 1 then passes to player 4 in one touch. Players
             repeat from the opposite side (b).
          6. Player 1 starts by dribbling the ball at an angle. He then passes the ball to
             player 2 and follows his pass to perform a double pass, or one-two, with
             player 2. Player 2 repeats with player 3.
          7. Add a second ball. Players 1 and 2 pass across at the same time.
               a. Players pass across, dribble, and switch balls in the center.
               b. Players pass across, dribble, switch balls once, then switch balls
                  twice.




64      Elite Soccer Drills
                       X3                                                X3
                  X1                                                     X1




                                                                     2


                                4

             2    1

                                                                                        15 yards
                            3       15 yards
                                                                                    3




                                                                              1

                                                             4




                       X2                                                X2
                       X4                                                X4

         a                                              b




E4409/Matkovich/05.01a/319689/TimB/R2-alw      E4409/Matkovich/05.01b/319690/TimB/R3-alw




                                                                 CHAPTER 5        Passing and Receiving   65
        33                          Groups of Four


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Create groups of four as shown; use two balls.
        Procedure
        Players 1 and 2 pass to players 3 and 4 at the same time. Players 3 and 4 receive
        and pass back to players 1 and 2, then turn to receive from the opposite side (a).
        Key Points
          • Zip the ball across when passing (pass time on).
          • Take a good first touch to prepare the ball for a pass.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.
          • Keep your feet moving before receiving the ball.

        Variations
          1. Players take only one touch.
          2. Players 3 and 4 start with the ball and double-pass at each end.
          3. After receiving the ball, players 3 and 4 turn and pass to the opposite side,
             then turn back to get the next ball from their original partners (b).
          4. Increase the distance so that the passes are flighted and players must
             receive balls out of the air.
          5. Players 1 and 2 must juggle the ball and play to players 3 and 4 in the
             air.




66      Elite Soccer Drills
                   X1                                                         X1



                                                                                   1
                           1
                                        10 yards                                                10 yards

                       2
                                                                  3


                                                                          4
               3   X4 X3            3                                                  X3
                                                                                                2
                                                              2   X4
                                                                                   4

                   2
                                                                                            3

                               1
                                        10 yards                                                10 yards

                                                                      1




                               X2                                             X2
           a                                              b


E4409/Matkovich/05.02a/319691/TimB/R2-alw

                                                   E4409/Matkovich/05.02b/319692/TimB/R3-alw




                                                                      CHAPTER 5        Passing and Receiving   67
        34                          Triangle Passing


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Create groups of four to eight players. Players form a triangle, 15 to 20 yards
        on each side.
        Procedure
        Player 1 passes the ball across to player 2 and follows the pass, moving to the
        end of player 2’s line. In two touches, player 2 controls and passes the ball across
        to player 3, who does the same, passing to player 4 (a).
        Key Points
          • Take the first touch across the body when receiving.
          • Zip the ball across when passing (pass time on).
          • Take a good first touch to prepare the ball for a pass.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. After receiving, players dribble halfway across and then pass while on
             the run.
          2. Players double-pass at each end: Player 1 passes to player 2, and in quick
             succession, player 2 passes to player 1, and player 1 passes back to player
             2 (b).
          3. Add a second ball. Players 1 and 2 both start with a ball and begin the
             activity by passing to players 3 and 4 simultaneously.
          4. Increase the distance so that the players must hit the ball along the ground
             with more pace.




68      Elite Soccer Drills
                                X3



                                                    20 yards




                                                            X2
    X4 X1

a



                                X3



             E4409/Matkovich/05.03a/319693/TimB/R3-alw




                                                3
                            2
        X1                                                     X2
                 1
b




             E4409/Matkovich/05.03b/319694/TimB/R4-alw




                                                CHAPTER 5      Passing and Receiving   69
        35                        Rectangle Passing


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Create groups of 6 to 10 players. Players form a rectangle, 15  40 yards.
        Procedure
        Player 1 plays a short pass to player 2. In two touches, player 2 controls and
        plays a long, flighted pass to player 3, who controls and plays a short pass to
        player 4. Player 4 controls and plays a long pass to player 5, continuing on in a
        short, long, short sequence until all players have had a play (a).
        Key Points
          • Overhit the long pass.
          • Take a good first touch to prepare the ball for a pass.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. Players double-pass after each long pass.
          2. Players take only one touch.
          3. Player 1 plays a long ball to player 2, who lays the ball off for player 1.
             Player 1 passes to player 3, who plays a long ball to player 4, who lays the
             ball off for player 3. Player 3 passes to player 5, who repeats the sequence
             (b).
          4. Add a second or third ball.




70      Elite Soccer Drills
                                                        X5
         X2                  X1 X5                      X1                                  X4
                   1
                                                                      6                 5




                                      40 yards      1
       2                       4
                                                                                                  4




                    3
    X3                       X4
                                                                           3
                                                          2

                                                        X2                               X3
                15 yards

   a                                               b
E4409/Matkovich/05.04a/319695/TimB/R2-alw


                                                 E4409/Matkovich/05.04b/319696/TimB/R2-alw




                                                              CHAPTER 5   Passing and Receiving       71
        36                       Four-Point Passing


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Give two balls to two groups of 7 to 12 players. Place outside cones 10 yards
        from the center cone.
        Procedure
        At the same time, players 1 and 5 pass balls to players 2 and 6. In two touches,
        players 2 and 6 control and pass to players 3 and 7, who do the same, passing
        to players 4 and 8 (a).
        Key Points
          • Take the first touch across the body when receiving.
          • Zip the ball across when passing (pass time on).
          • Take a good first touch to prepare the ball for a pass.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. Players play a one-two at points A and B. A one-two is a give-and-go, or
             a back-and-forth pass (b).
          2. Players dribble the ball halfway across, then pass.
          3. Reverse the direction, or rotation, of the passes.
          4. Increase the distance so that the players must hit the ball along the ground
             with more pace.




72      Elite Soccer Drills
                        X4
                        X5




                       1
                                      3



             2          X6            2
X7                                                X3
                        X2

                                   10 yards

             3               1




                        X1
                                                           X4
a                       X8
                                                           X5

     E4409/Matkovich/05.05a/319697/TimB/R2-alw


                                                       1
                                                                        5



                                              2
                             X7                        X6                      4
                                                                                    3
                                  3                    X2                                X3
                                      4
                                                                        2


                                                                1
                                          5




                                                           X1
                             b                             X8


                                  E4409/Matkovich/05.05b/319698/TimB/R2-alw

                                                            CHAPTER 5   Passing and Receiving   73
        37                                4v2 (+2)


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        In a 20-  60-yard grid, create two teams of four players. The coach stands at
        the midway point of the sideline with balls at his feet (a).
        Procedure
        Start play by serving a ball into one side of the grid. The team in possession
        attempts to connect 4 to 8 passes and play the ball back across the middle for
        a point. The defending team sends two players to defend the four, attempting
        to either knock the ball out of bounds or steal the ball and play it back across
        the middle to their teammates. A point is scored for the defending team only
        when they steal and play back across successfully. Players play three-minute
        rounds.
        Key Points
          • Take a positive first touch into space and away from pressure.
          • Pass time on when playing to a teammate.
          • To avoid having the ball stolen, make the time between the control and
            the pass as short as possible (b).

        Variation
        Add touch restrictions:
            1. Two touches
            2. One touch
            3. Three touches




74      Elite Soccer Drills
                            60 yards



                                               D
        X               X



                    X                  D                  D          20 yards



        X
                                              D



                              C
a




            E4409/Matkovich/05.06/319699/TimB/R2-alw




    b




                                                   CHAPTER 5   Passing and Receiving   75
        38                         Passing Windows


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Separate groups of 16 into 8 pairs. Half the pairs go to the center of a circle
        formed by the remaining eight players, who have a ball each. The diameter of
        the circle should be between 30 and 40 yards.
        Procedure
        Players 1 and 2 check to player 3. Player 3 passes the ball to player 1, who
        controls, passes back to player 3, and spins out. Player 3 passes to player 2,
        who controls, passes back, and follows player 1 to the next pass. All four pairs
        in the center are moving at the same time. Players play for one minute, then
        rotate positions.
        Key Points
          • Zip the ball across when passing (pass time on).
          • Take a good first touch to prepare the ball for a pass.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. Player 1 dummies the ball between his legs for player 2, who controls and
             passes back to player 3. A dummy is when a player lets a ball that is passed
             to her roll between her legs or past her for another player to receive.
          2. Player 1 controls, passes back to player 3, then “bumps off” to play a one-
             two with player 2. Bumping off means that the player who has just passed
             moves backward a few yards to create open space for the return pass.
          3. Player 3 throws the ball to players 1 and 2, who perform volleys, or control
             the ball to the ground and then pass it back.




76      Elite Soccer Drills
                      X3

                  1        3

     X3                    2        4     X3



                      X1       X2


          X1                             X1
X3         X2                           X2           X3




                       X2
     X3               X1                  X3



                      X3



          E4409/Matkovich/05.07a/319700/TimB/R2-alw




                                         CHAPTER 5   Passing and Receiving   77
        39                                    Pairs	


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Separate groups of four players into two pairs on opposite sides of a 40-yard
        area.
        Procedure
        Player 1 serves the ball to player 3, and then switches spots with player 2. Player
        3 receives the ball, lays it off for player 4, and bumps backward to make space
        for a return pass. Player 4 plays the ball back to player 3, who serves across to
        player 2.
        Key Points
          • Overhit long passes.
          • Get in line with the ball when receiving.
          • Bump off to create enough room for a pass and serve.

        Variations
          1. Player 1 plays the ball across on the ground. Player 3 dummies the ball
             between his legs for player 4. Player 4 plays a one-two with player 3 and
             then serves the ball back across for player 1 to dummy.
          2. Shorten the distance for shorter, ground passing.




78      Elite Soccer Drills
                  X3


          2

              3

     X4



              4




                                     40 yards
                           1




                            X2



                   X1

E4409/Matkovich/05.09/319703/TimB/R2-alw




                                      CHAPTER 5   Passing and Receiving   79
        40                          Groups of Three


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Players 1 and 2 stand, each with a ball, at either end of a 10- to 20-yard area.
        Player 3 stands in the middle, equidistant to players 1 and 2.
        Procedure
        Player 1 serves the ball to player 3, who checks back to player 1 to receive the
        pass. Player 3 then plays the ball back to player 1, and then spins out to check
        for a new pass from player 2. Player 2 passes to player 3, who receives, passes
        back, and checks back to player 1. Players repeat for one minute (a).
        Key Points
          • Take the first touch to the outside of the body.
          • Fake before receiving the ball.
          • Weight pass properly.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. Players 1 and 2 throw balls to player 3. Player 3 performs any of the fol-
             lowing:
                a. Inside-of-the-foot volley
                b. Laces volley
                c. Header
                d. Chest, then volley
                e. Chest, control to ground, pass
          2. Players 1 and 2 juggle the ball and serve out of the air, rather than holding
             the ball.
          3. Players use one ball. Player 3 checks to player 1, receives the pass, and
             turns, immediately passing to player 2. After player 2 has received the
             pass, player 1 checks to player 2, receives the pass, and turns, playing a
             pass back to player 1.
          4. Players use one ball. Player 1 passes to player 2 and follows the pass,
             rounding player 2 to receive a short pass on the opposite side. Player 1
             then plays a long pass to player 3 and follows the pass, rounding player
             3 to receive to receive a short pass on the opposite side. Player 1 finishes
             by dribbling back to the starting point (b).




80      Elite Soccer Drills
                         X1
                                                                         X2
                                                                    2
                     1



                              2
                                                                              1
                 3

                                      20 yards
                         X3                                              X1
                                                                3
                                  6

                              5                                                   5



                     4                                                       4

                         X2                                             X3
           a                                        b




                                                 E4409/Matkovich/05.10b/319705/TimB/R3-alw
E4409/Matkovich/05.10a/319704/TimB/R2-alw




                                                          CHAPTER 5     Passing and Receiving   81
        41                                Windows


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Use eight balls for 16 players. Eight players form a large circle, each with a
        ball at his or her feet. The diameter of the circle should be 30 to 40 yards. The
        remaining eight players stand in the center of the circle.
        Procedure
        At your signal, each of the eight inside players checks back to one of the outside
        players to receive a pass. In two touches, each inside player controls and returns
        the pass to an outside player, then turns and finds another outside player to
        receive a pass from. Players repeat for two minutes (a).
        Key Points
          • Vary the controlling surface when receiving.
          • Vary the passing surface when passing.
          • Fake before receiving the ball.
          • Weight pass properly.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. Inside players receive the ball and turn, dribble, then pass to any outside
             player.
          2. Inside players start with the ball, pass to an outside player, follow the
             pass, and overlap the outside player. The outside player passes the ball
             back into the path of the inside player (b).
          3. Outside players throw the ball as the inside players check back. Inside
             players perform any of the following:
               a. Headers
               b. Inside-of-the-foot volley
               c. Laces volley
               d. Chest, then volley
               e. Chest, thigh, volley




82      Elite Soccer Drills
            X                            X




                                                                   X
X

                       X    X
                                 X
                       X
                       X         X
                           X X
                                                                    X

    X



                                               X

                  X
a

                                                                                 2
                                                                           3 X
        E4409/Matkovich/05.11a/319706/TimB/R2-alw
                                          X

                                                                   1
                                                                                             X

                                 X
                                                               X
                                                   X                   X
                                                           X
                                                   X                    X
                                                           X       X
                                                                                                 X

                                     X



                             b                                                   X
                                                       X




                                         E4409/Matkovich/05.11b/319707/TimB/R3-alw




                                                                   CHAPTER 5     Passing and Receiving   83
        42                    Angle Passing and Receiving


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Give two balls to each group of seven players. Players organize themselves as
        shown. Balls start with players 1 and 2. The ball is passed in a zigzag sequence
        from one end of the line to the other.
        Procedure
        At your signal, player 1 plays a pass to player 3, and follows the pass to take
        player 3’s spot. Player 3 controls the ball, passes to player 4, and takes player
        4’s spot. Player 4 controls the ball, passes to player 5, and takes player 5’s spot.
        Player 5 passes to player 6 and goes to the end of player 6’s line. Player 6 dribbles
        the ball across to continue the sequence (a).
           When the first ball reaches player 4, player 2 starts the second ball, perform-
        ing the same sequence, so that two balls are in play at the same time.
        Key Points
          • Receive the pass across the body.
          • Fake before receiving the ball.
          • Zip the pass across to the next player.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. Players 1 and 3, 3 and 4, and 4 and 5 perform a one-two when exchanging
             the ball.
          2. Player 1 passes to player 3. Player 3 lays the ball back to player 1, who
             passes to player 4. Player 4 lays the ball back to player 3, who passes to
             player 5, and so on (b).
          3. Player 6 controls the pass and then plays a long, flighted pass back to the
             beginning, rather than dribbling across.




84      Elite Soccer Drills
                     X6                                                X6
                                                                   8

                                   15 yards                    9
                 4
                                                           7
                          5
            X5                                    X5                    10
                                                       6

                                   15 yards
                 3
                                                               5
                              X4                                                            X4
                                                                                     4
                          2

                                   15 yards


            X3
                                                  X3       3
                                                       2
             1                     15 yards
                     X1
                                                           1
                     X2                                                X1
                     X                                                 X2
        a                                     b                        X




E4409/Matkovich/05.12a/319708/TimB/R2-alw     E4409/Matkovich/05.12b/319709/TimB/R2-alw




                                                           CHAPTER 5        Passing and Receiving   85
        43                                Partners


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Players stand in two rows with one ball per two players. Player 1 starts with
        the ball. Player 2 faces player 1, standing 3 yards away.
        Procedure
        At your signal, player 1 passes to player 2 and moves forward. Player 2 passes
        the ball back to player 1 and jogs backward. The pairs repeat the sequence
        across a 40- to 60-yard area. Once the players reach the sideline, they repeat the
        sequence back across, with player 2 passing and moving forward and player
        1 jogging backward.
        Key Points
          • Stay balanced.
          • Vary the surface of the foot for passing and receiving.
          • Weight pass properly.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. Allow only one touch per player.
          2. Headers: Players must keep the ball in the air for each pass with a header
             and a volley return.
          3. Volleys
               a. All passes must be made with the inside of the foot.
               b. All passes must be made from the laces.
               c. Side volleys: The serving player throws the ball slightly to the side
                  of the receiving player.
          4. Players must control with the chest before volleying it back to player 2.




86      Elite Soccer Drills
           X1       X1         X1       X1       X1      X1           X
      2         1
                                                                           3 yards
      3
           X2       X2         X2       X2       X2       X2          X2

      4

      Repeat




40 yards




                         E4409/Matkovich/05.13/319710/TimB/R2-alw




                                                        CHAPTER 5   Passing and Receiving   87
        44                          Pattern Passing


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Organize groups of six players. Players 3 and 4 stay in the center for two min-
        utes, then rotate with two other players.
        Procedure
        At your signal, player 1 passes across to player 2 and overlaps player 2. Player 2
        controls and passes to player 3, who has checked back for the ball. Player 3 lays
        the ball back to player 1, who passes to player 4. Player 4 lays the ball back for
        player 2, who controls and passes to player 5. The players repeat the sequence
        going back across. Players repeat for two to four minutes (a).
        Key Points
          • Control the ball in the direction you will be passing.
          • Time runs properly.
          • Weight pass properly.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. Player 3 dummies the ball for player 4 and spins to face player 4. Player
             4 lays the ball off to player 3, who passes into the path of player 1. Player
             1 passes across to player 2. Player 2 passes to player 5, who starts the
             sequence in the opposite direction (b).
          2. Increase distances for longer passing.
          3. Require players to play with one touch.




88      Elite Soccer Drills
               15 yards


 X1                               X2                X1                                    X2
               1                                                   1

                          2



                                                                             2



                                                                            X3
                              4
                     3                 40 yards
                                                                                 4


                                                                       3
          X3                                                     X4
                                                                                     5
      6
                    X4
                5
                                                         6


 X5                               X6                X5                                    X6


  a                                                 b




E4409/Matkovich/05.14a/319711/TimB/R3-alw
                                                  E4409/Matkovich/05.14b/319712/TimB/R4-alw




                                                                CHAPTER 5    Passing and Receiving   89
        45                                    Circle


        Purpose
        Improve passing and receiving ability.
        Organization
        Create groups of 12 to 16 players. Eight to twelve players form a large circle (30
        to 40 yards in diameter), depending on the total number of available players.
        The four remaining players, each with a ball, stand inside the circle.
        Procedure
        Player 1 dribbles toward, then passes to, player 2 and takes player 2’s spot. Player
        2 passes to player 3 and takes player 3’s spot. Player 3 dribbles into the circle,
        passes to player 4, and takes player 4’s spot. Player 4 passes to player 5 and
        takes player 5’s spot. Player 5 dribbles into the circle, and the sequence repeats.
        Four balls are in play at the same time. Players repeat for three minutes.
        Key Points
          • Weight pass properly.
          • Make the time between the control and the pass as short as possible.

        Variations
          1. Player 1 passes to player 2 and follows the pass. Player 2 passes back to
             player 1. Player 1 passes to player 3 and takes player 3’s spot. Player 3
             dribbles into the circle and repeats the sequence.
          2. Player 1 passes to player 2. Player 2 passes to player 3 and overlaps player
             3. Player 3 passes to player 1, who passes to player 2 and then takes player
             1’s spot. Player 1 dribbles into the circle and repeats the sequence.
          3. Player 1 passes to player 2 and follows the pass. Players 2 and 3 perform
             a one-two around player 1. Player 2 ends with the ball and dribbles inside
             the circle to repeat the sequence.




90      Elite Soccer Drills
                           X2

        X3        2                     X




    X                                                X
                     1

             3                      X

X                     X1            X                    X


                                    X

    X                                                X


                                5
        X4       4
                                            X
                           X5




        E4409/Matkovich/05.15/319713/TimB/R2-alw




                                         CHAPTER 5   Passing and Receiving   91
        chapter 6


                      Heading


Over the past 20 years, the United States and its players have made great
strides in professional soccer. The U.S. national team has qualified for the
previous five World Cups, made a quarterfinal appearance in 2002, and
held a number 4 FIFA world ranking in April 2005. American players are
now playing in some of the best leagues in the world. Brian McBride, who
currently plays for and is the captain of Fulham FC in England’s Premier
League, is regarded as America’s best header of the ball. However, most top-
level coaches will agree that, particularly at the youth level, the one skill that
American players are not competent at is heading the ball. At all levels of the
game in the United States, our players lose opportunities because of a lack
of heading quality. Whether they miss a headed scoring chance or passing
chance, or simply concede territory, American players’ lack of quality head-
ing has a negative impact on their chances for success in most games.
   Other international players who are known for their ability to head the
ball are England and Chelsea’s John Terry, Liverpool’s Peter Crouch, and
Germany and Bayern Munich’s Miroslav Klose. All three have the ability to
change a game based on their ability to head the ball effectively.
   The most famous example of heading ability having a significant impact
on a game was in the 1998 World Cup Final between France and Brazil.
That game was largely decided by two headed goals, from corner kicks, by
Zinedine Zidane.
   A large part of the problem in the United States is that not enough head-
ing is done in training. Functional repetition, particularly with heading, is
necessary in order for players to be comfortable and excel at heading the
ball. It is crucial that coaches put players in positions to practice all three
types of heading. Consider how defenders on teams in the English Premier
League practice. The coach places the two central defenders deep in their
own half of the field and then splays long, flighted balls to them so they



                                                                                     93
94      Elite Soccer Drills


        can practice the techniques and timing used to perform a clearing header.
        Many teams also do the same exercise as part of warm-ups prior to matches.
        In addition, many of the best forwards spend time after training each day
        practicing heading crosses into the goal.


        Attacking Heading
        Generally, in the penalty box or in the attacking third, attacking heading is
        done to try to score a goal from a cross or flighted ball. When heading the ball
        in an attacking manner, and on goal, players generally head the ball down,
        toward the feet of the goalkeeper. The body mechanics can vary slightly,
        but oftentimes the attacking player jumps, attempts to make contact with
        the top of the ball, and snaps his head and upper body in the direction he
        wants the ball to go. The snap action is what generates not only the direc-
        tion, but more importantly, the power of the header. Players must also try
        to keep their eyes on the ball throughout the header.




        For a successful attacking header, the head and upper body should snap in the direction the player
        wishes the ball to go.
                                                               CHAPTER 6   Heading   95




Head Passing
Head passing is more subtle than attacking or defending heading. It often
requires the ability to redirect the ball to a teammate, or to open space, and
the ability to increase or decrease the speed of the ball.
   Using a header to pass the ball can obviously be done in any area of the
field. For this reason, all players should be adept at head passing. Unlike
attacking headers, in which the snap action generates power, head passing
requires a player to use her head and upper body to set, or guide, the ball
to a teammate. With head passing, power is not the goal; rather, the goal is
accuracy and weighting the pass properly so that a teammate can control
and use the ball as quickly and easily as possible.
   The flick header, in which a player skims, or flicks, the ball backward, is
also a very important form of head passing. The player skims the bottom of
the ball with the top of the head to gain territory or pass to a teammate. As
the ball makes contact with the head, the player flicks, or snaps, the head
backward. A center forward often uses this move to flick a long, aerial ball
backward for another forward to run to. The flick header can also be used to
gain territory from a throw-in. The player throws the ball down the line to
a teammate’s head; that teammate then flicks the ball backward into space
or to another teammate.


Defensive Heading
Defensive heading is primarily done in the defending third of the field
to clear the ball from danger. Because the general goal is to clear the ball,
players should attempt to get as much height and distance on the ball as
possible. Players should bend their knees slightly prior to making contact
and then spring, or explode, through the bottom of the ball to generate the
necessary height and distance.
   The following activities cover all three types of headers in a variety of
ways. They are designed so that players can maximize repetitions in func-
tional, gamelike situations.
        46                            Head Passing


        Purpose
        Improve head passing.
        Organization
        Form groups of three players, each with one ball. Player 1 stands 20 yards from
        players 2 and 3.
        Procedure
        Player 1 punts the ball toward player 2. As the ball travels, player 3 positions
        himself underneath player 2, ready to receive a head pass. Player 2 positions
        himself and performs a head pass to player 3. Players 2 and 3 then reverse roles
        for player 1’s next punt (a).
        Key Points
          • Set, or guide, the ball when head passing.
          • Use peripheral vision to locate the player receiving the pass.

        Variation
        Flick header: Player 1 punts to player 2. While the ball is traveling, player 3
        pulls wide and then runs in behind player 2, who flicks the punt for player 3
        to run to (b).




96      Elite Soccer Drills
                            X1




                                                1




               2

                                     3


    X3                                              X2
a

         E4409/Matkovich/06.02a/319715/TimB/R1



                              X1




                                               1




        X3                                           X2
    2
                                                                3


b

             E4409/Matkovich/06.02b/319716/TimB/R2-alw




                                                          CHAPTER 6   Heading   97
        47                      Up-and-Back Heading


        Purpose
        Improve overall heading ability.
        Organization
        Form groups of three players, each with one ball. In a 10-yard line, player 2
        stands between players 1 and 3. Player 1 starts with the ball.
        Procedure
        Player 1 throws or serves the ball to player 2. Player 2 head passes back to
        player 1, who heads the ball over player 2 to player 3. Player 3 head passes to
        player 2. Player 2 head passes back to player 3, who heads the ball back over
        player 2 to player 1. Players repeat back and forth for two minutes, then rotate
        the player in the middle (a).
        Key Points
          • Make contact with the appropriate part of the ball.
          • When heading over the middle player, bend the knees and spring through
            the bottom of the ball.
          • Set, or guide, the ball when head passing.

        Variation
        Flick header: Player 1 serves the ball for player 2 to flick to player 3. Player 3
        head passes back to player 2, who flicks the ball back to player 1. Players repeat
        back and forth for two minutes and then rotate (b).




98      Elite Soccer Drills
                  X1                                        X1




              1        2                               1            4




  3               X2             6                          X2




                                                       2            3
              4        5




  a               X3                           b            X3

E4409/Matkovich/06.03a/319717/TimB/R1   E4409/Matkovich/06.03b/321082/TimB/R2-alw




                                                        CHAPTER 6       Heading   99
      48                          Heading to Goal


      Purpose
      Improve attacking heading.
      Organization
      Form groups of four players, each with one ball. Players 1 and 2 are partners,
      and players 3 and 4 are partners. Each set of partners defends a goal. The playing
      area is 20  10 yards, with a goal, marked with poles or cones, in the center.
      Procedure
      Players 1 and 2 head juggle toward the goal that players 3 and 4 are defending.
      At any point, player 1 or player 2 can attempt to score a goal, with a header, on
      players 3 and 4. After players 1 and 2 have attempted to score, players 3 and 4
      do the same, moving toward the goal that players 1 and 2 are defending. Play-
      ers go back and forth for two minutes or until one pair reaches five goals; then
      they switch partners (a).
      Key Points
        • Head the ball down when attempting to score.
        • Jump and snap the head and upper body in the direction of the goal.
        • If the ball hits the ground while head juggling, it is a turnover.
        • You can use any part of your body to keep the ball in the air, but you must
          use your head to score.
        • The defending pair acts as goalkeepers and can use their hands.

      Variation
      Players head juggle forward and back, rather than side to side, so that player
      2 stands with her back to the goal and sets the ball for player 1 to head on goal
      (b).




100      Elite Soccer Drills
       X1                                                X2
                          1




                                       2
                                                              10 yards




                                                     3

                     X3                X4

a

    E4409/Matkovich/06.04a/319718/TimB/R3-alw




                                           X1




                                            1



                                           X2
                                   2



                          3


                              X3                X4
b



            E4409/Matkovich/06.04b/320050/TimB/R3-alw



                                                                  CHAPTER 6   Heading   101
      49                             Flick Headers


      Purpose
      Improve overall heading ability.
      Organization
      Form groups of four players, each with one ball. In a 15-yard line, players 2 and
      3 stand between players 1 and 4. Player 1 starts with the ball.
      Procedure
      Player 1 throws or serves the ball to player 2, who flicks it backward to player 3.
      Player 3 flicks the ball backward to player 4, who head passes it back to player
      3. Player 3 flicks to player 2, who flicks to player 1. Players repeat back and
      forth for two minutes, and then rotate the middle players (a).
      Key Points
        • Make contact with the appropriate part of the ball.
        • Set, or guide, the ball when head passing.

      Variations
        1. Player 1 throws or serves to player 2, who flicks to player 3. Player 3 head
           passes back to player 2, who head passes back to player 3. Player 3 flicks
           to player 4, who then passes back to player 3. Players repeat back and
           forth for two minutes, and then rotate the middle players.
        2. Player 1 throws or serves to player 2, who head passes back to player 1.
           Player 1 head passes over player 2 to player 3, who head passes to player
           2. Player 2 head passes over player 3 to player 4. Players repeat back and
           forth for two minutes, and then rotate the middle players (b).




102      Elite Soccer Drills
                   X1                                        X1




               1        6                            1
                                                                  2



                                                                           3
                   X2                                        X2




               2        5
                                                         4




                   X3                                        X3
                                                 5
                                                                                  8



                                                         6             7
               3        4




                   X4                                        X4
       a                                  b
E4409/Matkovich/06.05a/319719/TimB/R2-alw
                                     E4409/Matkovich/06.05b/319720/TimB/R2-alw




                                                                      CHAPTER 6       Heading   103
      50                            Heading Crosses on Goal


      Purpose
      Improve attacking heading ability.
      Organization
      Form two teams, A and B, from a group of 10 to 18 players, each with 10 balls.
      Teams A and B stand in two lines at the top of the penalty box on either side of
      the arc, or D. Servers A and B stand, with five balls each, between the edge of
      the box and the corner of the field.
      Procedure
      Server A serves a flighted ball into the penalty box. Player A1 runs into the
      box and heads the ball on goal, attempting to score. As soon as player A1 has
      attempted to score, server B serves a flighted ball for player B1 to head on goal.
      Players repeat back and forth for five minutes, keeping score, or until one team
      has scored five goals; then they rotate so that players on each team get a chance
      to be a server (a).




                                                      GK

                               SA                                           SB




                                             B1                A1
                                             B2                A2
                                             B                 A
                                             B                 A
                                             B                 A




                     a              E4409/Matkovich/06.06a/319721/TimB/R2-alw




104      Elite Soccer Drills
Key Points
  • Make contact with the middle or top of the ball.
  • Snap the head and upper body to generate power.
  • Head the ball down at the goalkeeper’s feet.

Variations
  1. Players A1 and A2 run into the box, one to the near post and one to the
     far post, and attempt to finish the cross from the server.
  2. Players B1 and B2 run into the box, one to the near post and one to the far
     post. Server B serves the ball to the near post, where player B1 flicks the
     ball to player B2 to finish with the head or feet (b).
  3. 1v1: Server A serves and player A1 attempts to score; player B1 must
     defend and clear the served ball.
  4. Server A serves a deep cross. Player A1 head passes down to player A2’s
     feet. Player A2 shoots or finishes on goal, with the feet.



                                       GK

                SA
                                                                 SB




                               B1                A1
                               B2                A2
                               B                 A
                               B                 A
                               B                 A




        b            E4409/Matkovich/06.06b/319722/TimB/R2-alw




                                                                  CHAPTER 6   Heading   105
      51                       Competitive Headers on Goal


      Purpose
      Improve attacking and defending heading ability.
      Organization
      Form two teams, A and B, from a group of 10 to 18 players, each with 10 balls.
      Teams A and B stand in the penalty box. Team A is attacking the goal; team B
      is defending the goal. Servers 1, 2, 3, and 4 position themselves, with balls, at
      each corner of the penalty box (a).
      Procedure
      Call out a number from 1 to 4. The corresponding server serves a ball into the
      box for teams A and B to compete for. Team A attempts to score, and team B
      attempts to clear. The ball is live until scored, cleared, or hit out of bounds. Play-
      ers repeat for three minutes and then rotate servers and teams in the box.




                                                 GK
                                 S1                               S4

                                             B   B    B
                                             A   A    A


                                 S2                               S3




            a

                                 E4409/Matkovich/06.07a/319723/TimB/R1




106      Elite Soccer Drills
Key Points
  • Attacking: Head the ball down. Position for a head pass, flick, rebound,
    or knockdown.
  • Defending: Clear with height and distance. Spring through the bottom of
    the ball. Be alert for flicks and knockdowns.

Variations
  1. Position servers 2 and 3 farther from the goal so that their crosses are from
     different angles (b).
  2. Add server 5, in the center of the field, 10 yards inside the halfway line.




                                       GK
                     S1                                  S4

                                   B    B   B
                                   A    A   A




           S2                                                       S3




   b

                      E4409/Matkovich/06.07b/319724/TimB/R1




                                                                CHAPTER 6   Heading   107
      52                       Handball With Headers to Score


      Purpose
      Improve overall heading ability.
      Organization
      Form groups of 10 to 18 players, each with one ball. In one half of the field,
      teams A and B each attack a goal (see diagram).
      Procedure
      Players pass the ball by throwing and catching. They may run with the ball
      until tagged, but then must stand still and pass. To score, the team must head
      the ball into the goal.
      Key Points
        • Head the ball down when attempting to score.
        • If the ball is dropped, it is a turnover.
        • Players cannot knock the ball out of an opposing player’s hands.

      Variation
      Players play the same game but must pass the ball using a throw-head-catch
      pattern.




108      Elite Soccer Drills
                  GK




A                         B
                      A                  A



    A             A             A



        B          B                 B


                   A


        B          B                 B

                  GK




E4409/Matkovich/06.08a/319725 /TimB/R2-alw




                                             CHAPTER 6   Heading   109
      53                            Clearing Headers


      Purpose
      Improve defensive heading.
      Organization
      Form groups of three players, each with one ball. Player 1 stands 20 yards from
      players 2 and 3.
      Procedure
      Player 1 punts the ball toward player 2. As the ball travels, player 2 positions
      himself to perform a clearing header over player 1, while player 3 drops off to
      cover behind player 2. On the next punt, players 2 and 3 then reverse roles for
      player 1’s next serve.
      Key Points
        • Bend your knees prior to contact and spring through the ball.
        • Make contact with the bottom of the ball.
        • Keep your eyes open and mouth closed.
                                           X1
      Variations
        1. Competitive headers: Player 1 punts the ball toward players 2 and 3, who
           compete, 1v1, to head the ball back to player 1.
        2. Player 3 stands directly behind player 2. Player 1 serves or throws the ball
           so that player 3 has to jump over player 2’s back to make contact with the
           ball.                                          1
                                           X1


                                             2




                                                                 1

                                                                      X2
                                                            X3
                                             2
                                                                  3




                                                                      X2
                                                            X3

                                                                  3



110      Elite Soccer Drills E4409/Matkovich/06.01/319714/TimB/R2-alw
       chapter 7


         Attacking
       and Defending

To develop players, as well as teams, you must have training activities and
exercises that replicate a match environment as closely as possible. Lt. Col.
H.T. Hayden, a successful U.S. marine, wrote the following in his 1995 book
titled Warfighting.
  Exercises should approximate the conditions of battle as much as pos-
  sible; that is, they should introduce friction in the form of uncertainty,
  stress, disorder, and opposing wills. This last characteristic is most
  important; only in opposed, free play exercises can we practice the art
  of war. Dictated or “canned” scenarios eliminate the element of inde-
  pendent, opposing wills that is the essence of combat.
   Clearly, soccer is not war. However, there are similarities between the
two in terms of training for success. Training activities for the game of soc-
cer are most effective when they replicate the randomness and competitive
nature of matches.
   The most critical component in soccer is transition, from attack to defense,
and from defense to attack. At the highest levels, the ability of players and
teams to transition quickly is the difference between winning and losing.
The only way to train players to make successful transitions is to replicate
the conditions of a match. You can do this by using a variety of games, con-
ditions, and field spaces during practices.
   By nature, the elite player is extremely competitive and wants to win in
every situation. Simply having a winner and a loser creates a match environ-
ment in practice. You can also create a competitive atmosphere by counting
points, passes, and goals, or by simply setting a time limit.



                                                                                  111
112         Elite Soccer Drills


             Making the field space larger or smaller during training changes the de-
          mands of the game. When the field space is smaller, players have less time
          to control the ball and make decisions when in possession. With a larger
          field space, players have more time on the ball, yet must transition faster
          on both sides of the ball to exploit the increased space.
             Placing touch restrictions on players during training games forces them
          to think and play more quickly, similar to the way they will have to think
          and play during a match. When they are limited to one or two touches on
          the ball, the players have to adjust their bodies to play more quickly, think
          in advance of the current play, and control the ball cleanly.
             The use of neutral zones in training games won’t necessarily put more
          restrictive pressure on players, but using them will allow players to work
          on a specific area of attack. For example, when there are “free” wide spaces,
          players are encouraged to play the ball to the wide player in the free zone,
          highlighting the wide attacking play. Using neutral zones helps players de-
          velop patterns and recognize the cues of the game, and it instills a general
          playing style within a team.
             Using multiple goals in training exercise can serve a variety of func-
          tions. The most obvious is creating more scoring situations. When multiple
          goals are used, the field space is usually wider than it is long. This encour-
          ages attacking players to move the ball from side to side, develop rhythm,
          and attempt to stretch the defending team to create scoring opportunities.




Practicing slide tackles within a narrowed field space highlights the approach and the importance of making
contact with the ball (instead of the opponent), which helps players learn to make quick and successful transi-
tions from defense to attack.
                                                  CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending   113



On the other side of the ball, the defending team must focus sharply on
staying connected, moving as a group, and recognizing when to press the
ball and when to drop off.
   Often, coaches use neutral, or plus, players in training. A neutral player
plays for whichever team has the ball and then changes to the opposite team
when possession is lost. The numerical advantage that neutral players give
to the team in possession results in the defending team having to concentrate
and transition quickly to win the ball back. Staying compact and moving as
a group is crucial for defenders because the opposite team has a numerical
advantage. The team in possession, meanwhile, must use its numerical ad-
vantage; quickly expanding the playing field by spacing out the attacking
players, for example, makes defending difficult.
      54                         Three-Goal Game


      Purpose
      Improve attacking and defending shape, positioning, and tactics.
      Organization
      Teams play 8v8; each team attacks three goals and defends three goals. The field
      is 70  50 yards. The goals are 3 yards wide and are marked with cones.
      Procedure
      Teams play 8v8 and attempt to score on the opposing goals. To score, players
      must keep shots on goal below knee height. No corner kicks are allowed. When
      a corner is won, that team restarts the game from its back line. If the ball goes
      over the sideline, a throw-in is taken to restart play.
      Key Points
        • Stay compact and together when defending, and move the ball from side
          to side when attacking.
        • Know when to pressure the ball and when to drop off, when defending.
        • Communicate with your teammates.

      Variations
        1. Add one or two neutral players, so that the defending team is at a disad-
           vantage and must focus on keeping its shape.
        2. Each player has a two-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed three touches.
        3. Each player has a one-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed two touches.




114      Elite Soccer Drills
3 yards                        3 yards                             3 yards




              X                  X                       X
                         O               O



                   X             X               X
                                                                                50 yards
                         O               O           O


                          X                  X
             O                       O                   O




                              70 yards




          E4409/Matkovich/07.03/319729/TimB/R3-alw




                                                     CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending   115
      55                       5v5 (+2) Possession


      Purpose
      Improve the ability to retain possession of the ball.
      Organization
      Form two teams of five, with two neutral players. Players are in a 30-  40-yard
      grid. Place extra balls around the outside of the grid.
      Procedure
      Teams play 5v5, with two neutral players on the team in possession, and attempt
      to connect seven passes in a row to score a point. The first team to get 2 points
      wins the game; the first team to win three games wins the series.
      Key Points
        • When your team is in possession, make the field as large as possible by
          spreading out.
        • Move off the ball to support teammates.
        • Play away from pressure.
        • Use a short-short-long passing pattern to draw the defending team in and
          then expose open space.
        • Communicate with your teammates.

      Variations
        1. Each player has a two-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed three touches.
        2. Each player has a one-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed two touches.
        3. Vary the number of consecutive passes needed for a point.
        4. Condense or expand the size of the grid to make it more difficult, or easier,
           to connect passes.




116      Elite Soccer Drills
                                    O
                O       4                           X
X


          N                 O                     O
                    3
                                N                                     30 yards
                        X
1
            2


              O                         X
     X




                    40 yards




E4409/Matkovich/07.04/319730/TimB/R3-alw




                                            CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending   117
      56                         Two-Target Game


      Purpose
      Improve a team’s ability to connect passes in a directional format.
      Organization
      Create a 40-  60-yard grid, and place extra soccer balls on each sideline to
      restart play quickly if the ball goes out of bounds.
      Procedure
        1. Players (Ot and Xt) from each team stand on each end line and act as
           targets for their team.
        2. The remaining five players from each team, plus one neutral player,
           attempt to pass the ball from end to end, using their target players for
           support if necessary, three times in a row. Example: Team A passes the ball
           to Target 1, then gets the ball back from Target 1, passes the ball amongst
           themselves in order to get it to Target 2, passes to Target 2, gets the ball
           back from Target 2, then passes again amongst themselves and eventually
           get it back to Target 1 for a point.
        3. When an inside player passes the ball to a target player, the inside player
           replaces the target player. The target player then joins the inside players
           by dribbling the ball back into the grid.
        4. The team in possession then attempts to get the ball to the target player
           on the opposite side.
        5. Getting the ball from target to target three times in a row without losing
           possession equals a point.
        6. The first team to score 3 points wins the game.

      Key Points
        • When in possession of the ball, look for targets first.
        • Move as a group to support target players.
        • Use a short-short-long pattern to draw the defending team in and then
          expose open space.
        • Overhit long, flighted passes.

      Variations
        1. Each player has a two-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed three touches.
        2. Each player has a one-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed two touches.
        3. Each player must take a minimum of three touches to keep the ball
           moving.




118      Elite Soccer Drills
        XT                                     OT




       1
                              6            OX
           X
               O



  2                                   N



                                                                   60 yards
  N                                       5

                         O                           O


                   X

                                                X

                                  3
                                                 4




      OT                                  XT

                       40 yards




E4409/Matkovich/07.05/319731/TimB/R2-alw




                                               CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending   119
      57              4v4 Square Possession With Bumpers


      Purpose
      Improve combination play and transitions.
      Organization
      Teams play 4v4 inside a 20-  20-yard grid. One neutral player plays on each
      side of the grid. Place extra balls around the outside of the grid so that play can
      be restarted quickly when the ball goes out of bounds.
      Procedure
      Teams play 4v4 inside the grid. The team in possession attempts to connect
      seven consecutive passes to score a point. The team in possession can pass to
      outside bumpers for support. Bumpers are allowed one touch only. Players play
      two-minute rounds and then rotate players in the middle and the outside. The
      first team to score 3 points wins the game; the first team to win three games
      wins the series (a).
      Key Points
        • Move to support the player in possession quickly, and as the ball is travel-
          ing.
        • When your team is defending, stay compact and seal off one side of the
          field when possible. Press the ball quickly and together.
        • Use bumper players to get out of tight spots.
        • Receive the ball across the body.
        • Know where the next pass should go.

      Variations
        1. Make the grid 15  15 and have players play 2v2, rather than 4v4, in the
           center. Have them play one-minute rounds. Five passes equal a point
           (b).
        2. Make the grid 10  10 and have players play 1v1 in the center for one-
           minute rounds. Five passes equal a point.




120      Elite Soccer Drills
                              N

                     1                2
                                                  O
             O
                 X                        X

                          3                           1
    N                                                       N   20 yards

                              O
              X                                   O
                                           5
                                          X
                     4


a                             N
                         20 yards




    E4409/Matkovich/07.06a/319732/TimB/R2-alw
                        N


              O                               3
         1    X
                                  4


     N                                                O     N 15 yards
                 2

                                              X




b                             N
                         15 yards




    E4409/Matkovich/07.06b/319733/TimB/R2-alw




                                                          CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending   121
      58                                           Four-Zone Game


      Purpose
      Improve a team’s ability to switch the ball from side to side quickly while retain-
      ing possession of the ball.
      Organization
      Split half a field, or a 60-  75-yard zone, into four equal zones. Place extra
      soccer balls outside the grid so that play can be restarted quickly when the ball
      goes out of bounds.
      Procedure
      Teams play 8v8 (+2) possession inside the main grid. Players are free to move
      into any zone in the grid. Teams attempt to connect 10 consecutive passes to
      score a point. They can make no more than four passes within any zone. The
      first team to score 2 points wins the game; first team to win three games wins
      the series (a).
      Key Points
        • Move quickly to support the player with the ball.
        • When your team is in possession, spread out so that not all players are in
          one zone.

                    Zone 1                                       Zone 2


                                                    XO
                                                                          OX
                                       1
                                                         2
                                           O
                               X

                                               3             X
                                   4                             O
                                               N
                    Zone 3                                       Zone 4       N
                                                     1
                                           X                                      OX


                               O
                                                         XO
                                                                          O
                                                                                       X




              a

                                       E4409/Matkovich/07.07a/319734/TimB/R2-alw

122      Elite Soccer Drills
  • The team in possession must have a deep outlet in a different zone.
  • Use a short-short-long passing pattern when in possession.
  • Move the ball quickly in the tight space of a zone.
  • Use driven or flighted balls to make big switches.

Variations
  1. Split the grid into six zones, rather than four, and allow only three passes
     within one zone (b).
  2. Each player has a two-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
     ception, players are allowed three touches.
  3. Each player has a one-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
     ception, players are allowed two touches.
  4. Each player must take a minimum of three touches to keep the ball
     moving.



                           1             X
                                                 4
                   X
                                             O           X
                                     3                            O
                       2

                            X                                                X
                                O
                                                             N
                                                                             O


                                N
                                                     X
                                                         O
                    XO




                                                                        O
                                    OX



            b
                E4409/Matkovich/07.07b/319735/TimB/R2-alw




                                                                 CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending   123
      59                       Three Zones Over the Border


      Purpose
      Improve a team’s ability to move the ball quickly.
      Organization
      Divide a 20-  45-yard grid into three equal zones. Divide players into three
      equal teams and position them in the three zones. Stand with soccer balls out-
      side the center of the grid.
      Procedure
        1. Serve the ball into team X’s zone.
        2. Team O sends two defenders into team X’s zone to attempt to steal the
           ball or knock it out.
        3. Team X attempts to connect five passes and then passes the ball into team
           Z’s zone.
        4. The O players in the center can block passes to other zones.
        5. If the Xs switch the ball into team Z’s zone, they win a point, and the
           Os send the middle players into team Z’s zone to defend. The original
           defending Os return to the center. The Zs try to connect five passes and
           switch the ball back to team X’s zone.
        6. If the Xs are unsuccessful, and the Os steal the ball, serve a new ball into
           team Z’s zone. The Os move into team X’s zone, and the Xs send two
           defending players into team Z’s zone and two into the center zone.
        7. The first team to score 3 points wins the game (a).

      Key Points
        • Move the ball quickly between players.
        • Weight passes appropriately.
        • Overhit switch passes.

      Variations
        1. Each player has a two-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed three touches.
        2. Each player has a one-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed two touches.
        3. Increase or decrease the number of consecutive passes needed to switch
           the ball (b).
        4. Make zones larger or smaller to decrease or increase the time and space
           when in possession.




124      Elite Soccer Drills
         Z               Z                                Z               Z




     Z                           Z                    Z                             Z




                 O                                    O
                                     O                                                  O



                                             C                                                          C




     O                       O
                                                         O                         O




                         1
                                 X                    X                               X
             X
                         2


                         4   3           7
             5



    X                            X                   X                              X
                     6




a                                                b
E4409/Matkovich/07.08a/319736/TimB/R1            E4409/Matkovich/07.08b/319737/TimB/R1


                                                              CHAPTER 7       Attacking and Defending       125
      60                           Passing Gates


      Purpose
      Improve a team’s ability to move the ball and defend as a group.
      Organization
      Randomly place 3-yard goals, marked by cones, throughout the inside of a 40-
       40-yard grid. Place extra soccer balls around the outside of the grid so that
      play can be restarted quickly when the ball goes out of bounds.
      Procedure
      Teams play 8v8 (+2) possession inside the grid. To score a point, a player must
      pass the ball through a goal to a teammate. Teams cannot score on the same
      goal twice in a row. The first team to score 10 points wins the game; the first
      team to win two games wins the series.
      Key Points
        • Move the ball quickly from side to side.
        • When your team is defending, stay compact and together.
        • Use a short-short-long passing pattern when possible.

      Variations
        1. Each player has a two-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed three touches.
        2. Each player has a one-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed two touches.
        3. Each player must take a minimum of three touches to keep the ball
           moving.




126      Elite Soccer Drills
                                 X

                                                               O


                     X                            X
                         O            O




                 N
                                              N
X                    2
    O                                                                                   40 yards

                             1            X
            X                             O



        O
                                                                        X
                                                                        O




                                     XO


                             40 yards




                E4409/Matkovich/07.09/319738/TimB/R3-alw




                                                  CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending       127
      61                       Possession to Targets


      Purpose
      Improve a team’s ability to possess and move the ball quickly.
      Organization
      Teams play 6v6 (+2) in a 30-  50-yard grid. Place extra soccer balls around
      the outside of the grid so that play can be restarted quickly when the ball goes
      out of bounds.
      Procedure
      Teams play 6v6 (+2) possession inside the grid. The team in possession attempts
      to move the ball from one target to the other, and then back to the first target,
      without losing possession. A point is scored by successfully moving the ball
      back and forth, without losing possession, three times. The first team to 3 points
      wins the game; the first team to win two games wins the series (a).
      Key Points
        • Look for target players (longer passes) first; play short only if a target is
          not an option.
        • Move the ball quickly through the middle of the grid.
        • Use a short-short-long passing sequence when possible.

      Variations
        1. After playing to a target, teams must connect five passes through the
           center before playing to the other target. This helps to establish a rhythm
           in possession (b).
        2. Each player has a two-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed three touches.
        3. Each player has a one-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed two touches.
        4. Each player must take a minimum of three touches to keep the ball
           moving.




128      Elite Soccer Drills
                      T1                                                       T1


                                                                                        1

            1         2


                              X                                                              X
                          O               7
                                                                                            O

       X
        O             3                                                    2



                                                                                    X
                      N                   OX                                            O
                                                                                                              50 yards
                                                                       3
       O                                                XO
       X                                                                                4
                                  N
                                                                           7                     X
                                               6                                                O
                                                          6
                  4                                                                     5

                                  OX                          O
                                                                  X
                                                                                            X
                                                                                            O
            O
        X
                                                                                        8
                                      5

                      T2                                                       T2
                                                                        30 yards
E4409/Matkovich/07.10a/319739/TimB/R2-alw
 a                                                  b


                                                   E4409/Matkovich/07.10b/319740/TimB/R2-alw




                                                                      CHAPTER 7     Attacking and Defending     129
      62                           Attack! Defend!


      Purpose
      Improve transition, defending ability, attacking ability, and finishing.
      Organization
      Place two goals 50 yards apart. Mark sidelines 30 yards wide. Players form two
      teams, X and O. Xs form a line at each post of goal 1, with balls at one post. Os
      do the same at the opposite goal.
      Procedure
      On your command, the first O in each line attacks the first X in each line (2v2).
      Os attempt to score; Xs attempt to stop them. After a goal, an attempt on goal,
      or a steal by the Xs, the next two Xs in line immediately attack the Os that just
      attacked. The first team to score 10 goals wins (a).
      Key Points
        • Attack with speed. Make angled runs and overlaps, not just straight
          downfield runs.
        • Transition from attack to defense as quickly as possible.

      Variations
        1. Teams place one line of players at the goalpost and the other on the opposite
           sideline, halfway up the field, allowing for an outlet upfield for a quicker
           attack (b).
        2. Players play 3v3 rather than 2v2.




130      Elite Soccer Drills
                   X              X                                   X
                   X              X                                   X
                   X              X                                   X
                           GK                                               GK




                                      X                           X
                                                                                    X
                    X

                                                        O             O                               X
                                            50 yards
                                                        O                                             X
                                                        O                               O             X
                       O        O




                           GK                                               GK
                   O              O                                                O
                   O              O                                                O
                   O              O
                       30 yards

          a                                               b
                                                       E4409/Matkovich/07.11b/319742/TimB/R3-alw




E4409/Matkovich/07.11a/319741/TimB/R3-alw




                                                                CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending       131
      63                        2v2 Make It, Take It


      Purpose
      Improve combination play and small-group defending.
      Organization
      Organize 12 players into two teams of 6. Mark a 20-  30-yard grid, with a
      3-yard-wide goal at each end. Each team places two players in the grid, two on
      the sidelines, and one on each side of its goal. Place extra soccer balls behind
      each goal.
      Procedure
      Teams play 2v2 in the center of the grid and attempt to score on the other team’s
      goal. Players are allowed to pass to any bumper, on either team, for support or
      to combine. Bumpers are neutral when they are on the outside, but are part of
      their own teams once rotated onto the field. Bumper players have one touch.
      Players rotate after each goal, or after 45 seconds. For the rotation, inside players
      go to the sidelines, sideline players move to the end line, and end line players
      move into the field. After a goal is scored, the two players on the end line of the
      team that scored start a new ball (make it, take it) and attack two new defending
      players from the opposite team’s end line.
      Key Points
        • Know where the next pass should go.
        • Use the bumper players when possible.
        • Play quickly in transition.
        • Close down passing lanes when defending.
        • Press the ball quickly; when defending, make players in possession put
          their heads down.

      Variations
        1. With additional players, play 3v3 in the center.
        2. With fewer players, play 1v1 in the center.




132      Elite Soccer Drills
            X                        X




X                                                X



                       1         X
                X
                                                     30 yards



                                     O
O               O                                O
        2




                3          4


            O                        O

                    20 yards


    E4409/Matkovich/07.12/319743/TimB/R3-alw




                                         CHAPTER 7    Attacking and Defending   133
      64                        Four Corners 2v2


      Purpose
      Improve attacking, finishing, and small-group defending.
      Organization
      Place two goals 50 yards apart. Mark sidelines 30 yards wide. Stand in the center
      of one sideline with extra soccer balls next to you. Teams form two lines each,
      one at each corner of the field.
      Procedure
      Start the game by playing a ball into the grid. The first player from each line
      runs onto the field, making it a 2v2 situation. Each team of two attempts to
      score on the opposing team’s goal. Start a new ball when a goal is scored or the
      ball goes out of bounds.
      Key Points
        • Attack quickly.
        • Press the ball quickly when defending.
        • Force the play to one side when defending.

      Variation
      The first two players from each line join play, making the game 4v4 rather than
      2v2.




134      Elite Soccer Drills
X                                                            X
X                                                            X
X                                                            X
                 GK




                                                                        C




                 GK
O                                                            O
O                                                            O
O                                                            O


    E4409/Matkovich/07.13/319744/TimB/R1




                                  CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending       135
      65                       Two Zone Over the Border


      Purpose
      Improve the ability to retain possession of the ball, and improve the ability to
      defend in small numbers as a group.
      Organization
      Mark a 50-  20-yard grid, with a center line splitting the grid in half. Split
      players into two teams of four. Stand at the center line with extra soccer balls.
      Procedure
      The teams start out in opposite halves of the field. Start the game by playing a
      ball to team X’s side. Team O sends three players into team X’s zone to defend.
      The Xs attempt to connect seven consecutive passes to score a point, while the
      Os attempt to either knock the ball out of bounds or steal it and return it to the
      remaining player on their side. The team in possession can use the entire grid
      (both zones), but has a numerical advantage only in its own zone. The defending
      team can send only three players into the opposite zone to defend. Teams play
      two-minute rounds. The first team to 3 points wins the game; the first team to
      win two games wins the series.
      Key Points
        • Move the ball quickly.
        • Know where the next pass should go.
        • Use open space to stretch out the defending team.
        • When defending, work as a group, press together.
        • Make the player in possession play short passes and squeeze the field
          with each pass.
        • Make players in possession put their heads down.

      Variations
        1. Each player has a two-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed three touches.
        2. Each player has a one-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed two touches.
        3. Increase or decrease the number of passes needed to score a point.




136      Elite Soccer Drills
                                               C
                                   X
               O       2

   X



           3               O
                                   1


                   O
       X
                               X




E4409/Matkovich/07.14/319745/TimB/R1




                                       CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending   137
      66                          6v6 (+6) to Goal


      Purpose
      Improve all-around attacking and defending.
      Organization
      Place two goals 36 yards apart and mark a 44-yard-wide sideline. Divide play-
      ers into three teams of six players. Two teams play 6v6 on the field, while the
      remaining six position themselves as bumpers around the outside of the field,
      one player on each sideline and one next to each post. The bumper players
      have one touch and play for whichever team has the ball. Place extra soccer
      balls in each goal so that play can be restarted quickly when the ball goes out
      of bounds.
      Procedure
      Start play by serving a ball into the grid. Teams attempt to score on goal. The
      first goal ends the game; the scoring team stays on the field and the losing team
      becomes the outside players. Allow no corner kicks; if a corner is won, the ball
      starts from the goalkeeper of the team that won the corner. Three corners won
      equals a goal. Bumper players are allowed only one touch.
      Key Points
        • Move as a group when defending.
        • Play in combination when possible to create scoring chances.
        • Always look for scoring opportunities.

      Variations
        1. Each player has a one-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed two touches.
        2. Each player has a two-touch maximum when in possession. On an inter-
           ception, players are allowed three touches.




138      Elite Soccer Drills
            Z                                     Z
                              GK



                O                      O
                             X




                             O                                             36 yards
Z   O                                                 O              Z
        X                                         X
                                   X



                    X         O
                                           X



                              GK
            Z                                     Z

                           44 yards


                E4409/Matkovich/07.15/319746/TimB/R2-alw




                                                 CHAPTER 7   Attacking and Defending   139
       chapter 8


           Crossing
         and Finishing

Crossing and finishing are both, in large part, technical actions. As with any
technique, development occurs mainly through repetition. At first, give your
players simple repetitions with rehearsed situations and pressure coming
only from performing the technique correctly. Then, as they become more
competent, increase the pressure by adding opponents, time constraints, and
competition within the team during training activities. At the AS Monaco FC
Academy in France, the youth teams conduct crossing and finishing training
three times per week. In each of the 75-minute sessions, every activity is to
goal. That repetition is necessary for creating top-level strikers.


Crossing
Accurate crossing allows a team and individual players to expose opponents’
weaknesses as well as create dangerous situations that result in scoring op-
portunities. Many people think of crossing as simply a wide player serving
the ball into the box from somewhere around the corner of the field. How-
ever, effective crossing comes in many forms: flighted crosses, near- and
far-post crosses, cutbacks, early crosses, deep crosses, crossing on the run,
and slip crosses, to name a few.
   To improve the quality of their crosses, players must rehearse each one
on a regular basis in functional, game-specific situations. When performing
the crossing actions within each activity, players should focus on staying
calm and controlling their bodies as they strike the ball. Balance is critical
to crossing technique.


                                                                                 141
142      Elite Soccer Drills


         Players should also have a purpose when crossing. That is, they should
      have a specific idea of where they want the ball to go. The touch-look-cross
      pattern is a good way to get players in the habit of having a purpose. The
      “look” step in the pattern is critical. After the player takes her last touch,
      she either physically looks up or uses her peripheral vision to take a men-
      tal snapshot of the players inside the box. She uses the mental snapshot to
      determine the most effective spot for the cross.
      Near-Post Cross With the near-post cross, the ball is served in the air or
      on the ground to the near post of the goal for an attacker to strike on goal,
      flick to a deeper spot in the box, or dummy for another attacker to strike on
      goal. Near-post crosses are most effective when an attacker in the box is on
      the run and can beat the defender or goalkeeper to the ball.


                                           GK


                                       O                             X
                                                 O
                                       X                         O




                  Near-post cross.


      Far-Post Cross With the far-post cross, the ball is served, mainly in the
      air, to the back-post E4409/Matkovich/08.01/319785/TimB/R1
                             area of the penalty box after an attacker has either
      pulled away from his marker or is arriving late to the box, or after one or
      more attackers have made runs to the middle and near post of the goal. An
      effective far-post cross puts the ball where defenders in the middle and at
      the near post cannot get to it and where the goalkeeper cannot come out to
      catch or punch it.
                                                     CHAPTER 8   Crossing and Finishing   143




                                      GK

                                      O
                                      X                          X
                                 O     O
                                 X         X




       Far-post cross.


Cutback Cross TheE4409/Matkovich/08.02/319786/TimB/R1
                       cutback cross is done mainly inside the penalty box,
when the attacker finds himself, through dribbling or a pass, at the end line
of the field and behind the back line of the defending team. The attacker
with the ball draws defenders toward him and cuts the ball back, on the
ground or in the air, to the center of the goal for another attacker to strike.
The cutback is effective because it draws the goalkeeper and defenders away
from the center of the goal and forces the defenders to turn their backs on
the attackers they are marking to watch the ball.
Crossing Behind the Back Line Another effective form of crossing is
achieved when the ball is served early, from a deeper position, into the space
behind the defending team’s back line. The cross is usually an outswinging
or a whipped cross, or both, spinning away from the goal and toward the
oncoming attacker. This type of cross is performed to expose the dangerous
space between the defending team’s back line and the goal. Similar to the
cutback, a quality cross behind the back line gives an advantage to the central
attacking players because the defenders who are marking them must first
turn, or run backward, to defend the open space. That split second when
the defender has to turn allows the attacker to get to the ball first.
                                           GK
                                                O
                                                        O
                                                            X


                                       X




      Cutback cross.


                        E4409/Matkovich/08.03/319787/TimB/R1
                                        GK




                               O                                O   X
                                                    O
               O


           X                           X            X
                                                            O




      Crossing behind the back line.



144                     E4409/Matkovich/08.04/319788/TimB/R1
                                                                       CHAPTER 8   Crossing and Finishing   145




Finishing
Like crossing, finishing is a technique that is developed through continual
repetition. Some people believe that great goal scorers have an innate gift
that cannot be taught; others believe that great goal scoring can be taught.
What cannot be argued, however, is that to develop and refine finishing
ability, players must continually be put in finishing situations that replicate
those found in the game.
   Finishing can take many forms. Shooting off the dribble, one-touch fin-
ishing, two-touch finishing, volleys, side volleys, bicycle kicks, and headers
are but a few of the varieties. Good goal scorers use just about every part of
their bodies to put the ball in the net.




Proper foot placement in relation to ball position is critical to successful finishing.
146      Elite Soccer Drills


         The moments before a goal-scoring opportunity are often the most frantic.
      On both sides of the ball, when close to the goal, players have a heightened
      sense of urgency, which can sometimes cause panic. The game can seem
      to speed up. Top-level finishers are calm and balanced; for them, the game
      seems to slow down and defenders seem to be in slow motion at the criti-
      cal moment.
         Good finishers also have the ability to time their runs into the penalty
      box in a way that allows them to arrive at the ball before the defenders or
      goalkeeper. The most effective finishers are active, which makes it easier
      to adjust to the position of the ball. Players should time their runs into the
      box so that they are arriving as the ball arrives. If a player runs into the box
      and then has to stop and wait for the ball, chances are that a defender will
      beat her to the ball. A player arriving at speed as the ball arrives is very dif-
      ficult to defend.
         Some scoring opportunities call for the ball to be placed, or passed, into
      a specific area of the goal, whereas others call for the ball to be shot, with
      power, at the goal. Both can be equally exploited; a player’s choice depends
      on his ability to process the variables and his mental snapshot of the players
      in front of him. Generally the closer a player is to the goal, the more likely
      he is to go for accuracy rather than power.




      A good finisher can strike the ball at a variety of angles and heights.
                                                    CHAPTER 8   Crossing and Finishing   147



   Other variables, such as the positioning of the goalkeeper, the angle of
the shot, the player’s control of the ball, the player’s balance, and pressure
from defenders also factor into the decision of what finishing technique to
use. Training activities in which players are given a variety of goal-scoring
situations will help players become more comfortable and confident when
finishing.
      67                        Two-Post Finishing


      Purpose
      Improve shooting technique and accuracy from long range.
      Organization
      Set two goals 36 yards apart. Each player has a ball. Players form two lines at
      opposite goals. Place a cone in the middle (18 yards from each goal) for players
      to use as a reference.
      Procedure
      At the same time, players X and O dribble toward opposite goals and shoot as
      they approach the halfway point (top of the box), as shown in the diagram. Both
      players follow their shots for rebounds, collect their balls, and switch lines.
      Key Points
        • Use peripheral vision to note the goalkeeper’s position and use it to decide
          between accuracy and power.
        • Strike through the center of the ball with the laces.
        • Toes should be pointed down, and the knee should come up during the
          follow-through.

      Variations
        1. The second players in line (X2 and O2) pass their balls out in front for the
           first players in line (X1 and O1) to run to and shoot.
        2. Players X2 and O2 throw their balls out in front for players X1 and O1 to
           either control and shoot, or shoot off the volley.
        3. Players X1 and O1 run, without balls, toward the opposite goals. Players
           X2 and O2 pass their balls out in front of the goals for players X1 and O1
           to finish with one touch.
        4. Players X2 and O2 throw their balls in the air for players X1 and O1 to
           volley.
        5. Players X2 and O2 throw their balls for players X1 and O1 to head on
           goal.
        6. Players X1 and O1 start in the center with their backs to the opposite goals.
           Players X2 and O2 pass their balls out for players X1 and O1 to control,
           turn, and shoot.
        7. Players X2 and O2 throw their balls so players X1 and O1 must take them
           out of the air.
        8. Make any of the activities competitive by setting a time limit and having
           each team count its goals.
        9. Game within the game: Each player matches up with a partner in the
           opposite line and competes against that player in addition to competing
           as a group against the opposite line.



148      Elite Soccer Drills
     O
     O
     O
     O
            GK




                                                         36 yards




            GK
                    X
                    X
                    X
                    X

E4409/Matkovich/08.05/319789/TimB/R2-alw




                                  CHAPTER 8   Crossing and Finishing   149
      68                          Two-Goal Finishing


      Purpose
      Improve ability to shoot while running with the ball.
      Organization
      Set two goals 36 yards apart. Each player has a ball. Players form two lines
      midway between the two goals, on opposite sides.
      Procedure
      At the same time, players X1 and O1 dribble toward their goals and shoot as
      they reach the center. Both players follow their shots for rebounds, collect their
      balls, and switch lines (a).
      Key Points
        • Use peripheral vision to note the goalkeeper’s position and use it to decide
          between accuracy and power.
        • Run straight on before shooting; do not use a bent run.
        • Strike through the center of the ball with the laces, or the top of the foot.
        • Land on the kicking foot.
        • Toes should be pointed down, and the knee should come up during the
          follow-through.




                                               GK



                                                          X1 X X X
                               O O O O1




                                               GK

                    a


                                 E4409/Matkovich/08.07a/319791/TimB/R1




150      Elite Soccer Drills
Variations
  1. Players X2 and O2 pass their balls out in front for players X1 and O1 to
     run onto and shoot (b).
  2. Players X2 and O2 throw their balls out in front for players X1 and O1 to
     either control and shoot, or shoot off the volley.
  3. Players X1 and O1 run, without balls, across the goal. Players X2 and O2
     pass their balls out in front of the goals for players X1 and O1 to finish
     with one touch.
  4. Players X2 and O2 throw their ball in the air for players X1 and O1 to
     volley.
  5. Players X1 and O1 start in the center, with their backs to the opposite goals.
     Players X2 and O2 pass their balls out for players X1 and O1 to control,
     turn, and shoot.
  6. Players X2 and O2 throw their balls so players X1 and O1 must take them
     out of the air.
  7. Make any of the activities competitive by setting a time limit and having
     each team count its goals.
  8. Game within the game: Each player matches up with a partner in the
     opposite line and competes against that player in addition to competing
     as a group against the opposite line.




                                       GK



                     O O O2 O1                     X1 X2 X X




                                       GK

         b


                      E4409/Matkovich/08.07b/319792/TimB/R2-alw




                                                       CHAPTER 8   Crossing and Finishing   151
      69                                    3v1 Finishing


      Purpose
      Improve shooting and finishing technique from open play, while under pres-
      sure from a defender.
      Organization
      Set two goals 30 to 36 yards apart (depending on the ability of your players).
      Mark a halfway line. Place extra balls in the goals. Teams A and B have three
      players in their defending half, and one player in their attacking half (3v1 in
      each half). No player from either team can cross the halfway line. Team C stands
      behind each of the goals to retrieve balls.
      Procedure
      Play starts with the goalkeeper from team A passing the ball to a teammate.
      Team A moves the ball around its half to create a shooting opportunity. Play is
      live, so player B can steal the ball and score (a).
      Key Points
        • No player from either team can cross the halfway line.
        • A shot resulting in a corner kick restarts from the goalkeeper of the team
          that won the corner kick.




                                                    GK


                                                     B


                                                    A
                                     B                             B




                                                     B
                                    A                                  A

                                                    A



                                                    GK


          a

                               E4409/Matkovich/08.08a/319794/TimB/R3-alw


152      Elite Soccer Drills
  • Teams rotate each time a goal is scored (i.e., score to keep the field).
  • Teams can pass to their player across the halfway line, using them for quick
    combinations when creating a scoring opportunity.
  • Use peripheral vision to note the goalkeeper’s position and use it to decide
    between accuracy and power.
  • Land on the kicking foot.
  • Toes should be pointed down, and the knee should come up during the
    follow-through.
  • Follow all shots.

Variations
  1. Players play one-touch, except for attacking-half players A and B, who
     have unlimited touches.
  2. When attacking, one player can cross the halfway line by dribbling or to
     combine with attacking-half players A or B (b).




                                     GK


                                      B


                         B           A
                                                    B




                     A                                  A
                                      B
                                     A



                                     GK


  b

               E4409/Matkovich/08.08b/320058/TimB/R2-alw


                                                     CHAPTER 8   Crossing and Finishing   153
      70                         2v2 to Two Goals


      Purpose
      To improve close range, reaction type finishing.
      Organization
      Set two goals 18 yards apart. The field is the size of the penalty box. Mark out
      two channels on the outside of the box. Create two teams of six, each with two
      players in the box, two on the end line of the attacking goal, and one on each
      sideline.
      Procedure
      Players play 2v2 inside the box. Outside (bumper) players have two touches to
      cross the ball from the sides and keep it in play on the end lines. Players play
      two-minute intervals and then rotate positions (a). (Note: A bumper player is a
      neutral player who stays on the outside of the grid and acts as a wall, or bumper,
      to keep the ball in play.)
      Key Points
        • Have an attacking mentality, looking to score at every moment.
        • Position so that crosses can be attacked.
        • Follow all shots.
        • Drive crosses to the near post and chip crosses to the far post. A driven
          cross is a line drive, fast-moving cross. A chip is a lofted, slower-moving
          cross.

      Variations
        1. Reshape the sidelines so that outside players can dribble toward the near
           post. Balls crossed from the end lines should now be cutback on the ground
           (b).
        2. Outside players can defend each other once they have received a pass.
        3. Make the activity competitive by keeping an aggregate team score.
        4. Game within the game: Each pair matches up with a pair from the opposite
           team and competes against that pair, in addition to competing as a group
           against the opposite team.




154      Elite Soccer Drills
        X                        GK              X


X                                                                            X
                             O    O

                         X       X




O                                                                            O


        O                        GK              O
    a

            E4409/Matkovich/08.09a/319796/TimB/R2-alw

        X                        GK              X


X                                                                            X
                             O    O

                         X       X




O                                                                            O


        O                        GK              O
    b

            E4409/Matkovich/08.09b/319797/TimB/R2-alw



                                            CHAPTER 8   Crossing and Finishing   155
      71                           2v2 in the Penalty Box


      Purpose
      Improve shooting and finishing technique and accuracy.
      Organization
      The field is the penalty box. Two players from each team are in the center of
      the box; all additional players surround the penalty area and act as bumpers
      for their team. Serve balls into play from the top of the box.
      Procedure
      Players play 2v2 inside the box. Outside (bumper) players have one touch to
      keep the ball in play. Serve the ball into the box to start game; then serve a new
      ball each time a goal is scored or the ball goes out of play. Players play one-
      minute intervals and then rotate positions (a).




                      O        X                    GK                     O   X



            X                                                                      O



                                            O                O


                                    X                X
           O                                                                       X



                          X         O                            X             O
                                                C


                 a


                                   E4409/Matkovich/08.10a/319798/TimB/R1




156      Elite Soccer Drills
Key Points
  • Have an attacking mentality, looking to score at every moment.
  • Use peripheral vision to take mental snapshots of the goalkeeper’s posi-
    tion.
  • Follow all shots.

Variation
Outside players can join the play by dribbling into the box when passed the
ball (b).




           O       X                    GK                       O         X



   X                                                                                   O



                                O                O


                        X                X
   O                                                                                   X



               X        O                            X                     O
                                    C


       b


                       E4409/Matkovich/08.10b/319800/TimB/R1




                                                     CHAPTER 8       Crossing and Finishing   157
      72                       2v2 (+1) Serving in the Box


      Purpose
      Improve close range shooting and finishing, from balls served into the box.
      Organization
      Set two goals 18 yards apart. The field is the size of the penalty box. Place serv-
      ers, with soccer balls, at each corner of the box. Two players from each team,
      plus one neutral player, are inside the box.
      Procedure
      Players play 2v2 (+1) inside the box. Call out a server number. That server
      crosses the ball into the box for both teams to attempt to score. Players play
      two-minute intervals (a).
      Key Points
        • Have an attacking mentality, looking to score at every moment.
        • Position so that crosses can be attacked.
        • Follow all shots.
        • Drive crosses to the near post and chip crosses to the far post.

      Variation
      Use only one goal so that one team is attacking and one is defending (b).




158      Elite Soccer Drills
    S1                        GK                                         S4




              N                        O
                              O
                      X            X




    S2                                                                   S3

a




          E4409/Matkovich/08.11a/319801/TimB/R1



    S1                        GK                                         S4




                  X                X
                          O
                                       O




    S2                                                                   S3

b

         E4409/Matkovich/08.11b/319802/TimB/R2-alw


                                           CHAPTER 8   Crossing and Finishing   159
      73                                  4v4 with Wingers


      Purpose
      Improve shooting and finishing from open play
      Organization
      Create a 50-  40-yard field with a goal on each end line. Players play 4v4
      inside the field, with each team having a free wide player on each side of its
      attacking half.
      Procedure
      Players play 4v4 inside the box. Neutral players have two touches and look to
      cross each time they receive the ball. Neutral players cannot defend each other.
      Players play four-minute intervals and then rotate positions (a).
      Key Points
        • Have an attacking mentality, looking to score at every moment.
        • Position so that crosses can be attacked.
        • Follow all shots.
        • Drive crosses to the near post and chip crosses to the far post.


                                                   GK

                          X                                                X
                                                    XO




                                                            O
                                                                X
                                                                               50 yards
                                            XO


                         O                                                 O

                                                   O
                                                   X




                                                   GK


                                                 40 yards

                               a


                               E4409/Matkovich/08.12a/319803/TimB/R2-alw
160      Elite Soccer Drills
Variations
  1. Reshape the sidelines so that outside players can dribble toward the
     near post. Balls crossed from the end lines should now be cutback on the
     ground.
  2. Outside players have unlimited touches and must start in their attacking
     half, but can defend each other once they have received a pass.
  3. One inside player can overlap the neutral player on the outside, making
     a 2v1 situation on the outside (b).
  4. Make the activity competitive by keeping an aggregate team score.



                                 GK




    X                             X                                        X
                                  O




                    XO                         OX




    O                             O                                       O
                                  X




                                 GK

        b

                E4409/Matkovich/08.12b/319804/TimB/R1




                                                    CHAPTER 8   Crossing and Finishing   161
      74                       Partner Crossing and Finishing


      Purpose
      Improve crossing and finishing technique and accuracy.
      Organization
      Create a field that is double the size of the penalty box, and set one goal on each
      end line. Two players from each team start in the playing area. Teams form two
      lines each at opposite ends of the field. Balls start at opposite corners.
      Procedure
      Players A1 and A2 attack goal 1 to start. Players B1 and B2 attack goal 2 to start.
      At the same time, players A3 and B3 pass balls to players A4 and B4 and follow
      their passes. Players A4 and B4 lay the balls off for players A3 and B3 to serve
      into the box. Players A1 and B1 and players A2 and B2 make near- and far-post
      runs, respectively, and attempt to finish the cross. Inside players run toward the
      opposite goals to receive the next cross. Players play one-minute intervals (a).
      Key Points
        • Drive crosses to the near post and chip crosses to the far post.
        • Concentrate on making solid contact with the ball when finishing.
        • Time runs so that you arrive as the ball arrives.

      Variation
      Player A3 passes the ball to player A4 and then overlaps player A4 so that the
      ball is moving away from player A3 before the cross (b).




162      Elite Soccer Drills
    B                                                                 A
    B                                                                 A
    B3                      GK                                        A4




                      A1            A2
                      B1            B2




    B4                      GK                                        A3
    B                                                                 A
    B                                                                 A

a

         E4409/Matkovich/08.13a/319805/TimB/R2-alw
    B                                                                 A
    B                                                                 A
    B3                      GK                                        A4




                      A1            A2
                      B1            B2




    B4                      GK                                        A3
    B                                                                 A
    B                                                                 A
b

         E4409/Matkovich/08.13b/319806/TimB/R2-alw
                                          CHAPTER 8 Crossing and Finishing   163
      75                       Near- and Far-Post Finishing


      Purpose
      Improve crossing technique and accuracy, and finishing technique and accuracy
      around the penalty box.
      Organization
      The field is the penalty box. Two servers are positioned outside the box. Two
      players start at the top of the box.
      Procedure
      Player X1 plays the ball out to player S1 (server 1), who dribbles the ball to the
      end line and crosses. Players X2 and X3 make near- and far-post runs, respec-
      tively, and attempt to finish the cross. Players repeat from the other side once
      the ball is out of play (a).
      Key Points
        • Position so that crosses can be attacked.
        • Follow all shots.
        • Drive crosses to the near post and chip crosses to the far post.
        • When crossing, turn your hips so that they are facing where the cross will
          go.

      Variations
        1. Player S1 dribbles to the end line, toward the near post, so that the cross
           is cut back on the ground or chipped to the far post (b).
        2. Player X1 plays the ball out in front of player S1, so that player S1 is run-
           ning to the ball when crossing.
        3. Player S1 is positioned so that the cross is coming from a deep position.
           Player X1 lays the ball off for player S1 to serve with one touch.
        4. Player S1 is positioned so that the cross is coming from near the corner
           flag. The cross should be driven to the near post.
        5. Player S1 is positioned so that the cross is coming from wide of the pen-
           alty area and on the ground behind the back line of the opposing team.
           Player X1 plays the ball to player S1, who controls it and then plays it on
           the ground in front of players X2 and X3.




164      Elite Soccer Drills
                          GK




                    X2              X3
S2                                                                      S1
                    O2              O3
     O1                                          X1

a


          E4409/Matkovich/08.14a/319807/TimB/R2-alw


                          GK




S2                  X2              X3                                 S1
                    O2              O3
     O1                                          X1

b


          E4409/Matkovich/08.14b/319808/TimB/R2-alw




                                         CHAPTER 8   Crossing and Finishing   165
       chapter 9


           Conditioning


Soccer players need technical ability, tactical understanding, and mental
toughness in order to succeed. At the highest levels, soccer-specific condition-
ing and fitness are also crucial to players’ ability on the field. Without a high
level of conditioning, players will inevitably fall short in match situations.
   A famous, and somewhat controversial, example of a team’s condition-
ing program is from the 2006 World Cup. Jurgen Klinsmann, the German
national team coach, gave each of his players a conditioning program to
follow in the year leading into the World Cup. Each player had his own
program to follow, which was specific to that player’s position and optimal
fitness level. The fitness program was successful: The German team took
third place, losing to eventual world champion, Italy, in the semifinals. The
program was controversial in Germany, however, because Klinsmann used
American fitness experts to develop the program.


General Soccer Endurance
General soccer endurance can be described as a player’s ability to deal with
the varied intensity of a match. A soccer player covers a distance of 3 to 6
miles (about 5 to 10 km) during the course of an average soccer match, dur-
ing which the player may be sprinting, jogging, or walking. A high level of
general endurance helps players deal with fatigue and allows them to exert
optimal effort throughout a match.
   Interval training is the most common method of improving players’
endurance. It includes both a work and a rest period. During the work pe-
riod, the player reaches 80 to 95 percent maximum heart rate, and during
the rest period the player recovers to approximately 20 percent maximum
heart rate.



                                                                                    167
168      Elite Soccer Drills


         The ratio of work to rest is the critical component when working to im-
      prove soccer fitness. When a player is just beginning to train, a work-to-rest
      ratio of 1:3 may be appropriate. For example, a player may work for 15 sec-
      onds and rest for 45 seconds, then repeat the exercise. As the player becomes
      more physically fit, the ratio may be lowered to 1:2 or 1:1.
         During rest periods, players should carry out some form of light, soccer-
      related activity, and not simply come to a complete stop. For example, they
      may juggle individually or pass with partners during the rest period.
         Effective interval training will improve players’ ability to recover quickly
      from periods of high intensity, allowing them to be more effective during
      a match.


      Complete Soccer Fitness
      In addition to training for endurance with cardiorespiratory training, top-
      level players must also condition a variety of other athletic attributes, such
      as flexibility, agility, balance, speed, strength, and power. Teams and coaches
      often use agility and flexibility exercises as warm-ups or cool-downs dur-
      ing training. This helps the players prepare or recover, as well as improve
      their conditioning.

      Flexibility
      The ability to conduct movements with an appropriate range of motion de-
      termines a player’s flexibility. The two most common methods of increasing
      flexibility are static stretching (standing toe touches) and dynamic stretching
      (lunges). Static stretching is commonly used for general flexibility, whereas
      dynamic stretching can be used for soccer-specific movements.
         Increasing flexibility helps players perform technical actions more ef-
      ficiently and also aids in injury prevention. With a high level of flexibility,
      players are less prone to soft tissue injuries such as muscle pulls and joint
      sprains.

      Agility
      Agility can be defined as a player’s ability to change direction quickly and
      easily. For soccer purposes, a player should work to improve the ability to
      change direction both with and without the ball. Incorporating an agility
      ladder, juggling routine, and fast footwork into training can help to improve
      agility. Dribbling a ball through cones set up in a slalom formation, for ex-
      ample, or moving without a ball through an agility ladder with both feet
      touching inside each block can help improve agility.
                                                                               CHAPTER 9   Conditioning    169




When performing agility ladder work, it is important to allow enough distance between players to prevent inter-
ference.



      Balance
      Top-level players have the ability to maintain balance while running with
      and without the ball, before and after jumping, and most important, when
      being challenged or challenging for the ball. Small-sided games, circuit
      training, and agility ladders in training provide a variety of situations and
      repetitions that improve balance.

      Speed
      Soccer-specific speed is more than just the ability to cover distance in a short
      time. Although covering distance quickly is crucial, the ability to cover the
      distance with and without the ball, manipulate the ball quickly, and process
      information and take action quickly are also important. Improving speed is
      difficult and generally is done through exercise repetition and small-sided
      games.
170      Elite Soccer Drills



      Training Methods
      Conditioning can be improved in a variety of ways. Basic training can in-
      clude running and sprinting over a distance, both with and without the ball,
      and stretching—both static and dynamic. High-intensity small-sided games
      allow players to work at a high rate for a limited time and then rest. Circuit
      training, in which players rotate through a variety of conditioning stations,
      is also a good way to improve players’ conditioning.
         Because as a coach you have a limited time with players, training must
      be as economical as possible. Using activities that improve conditioning as
      well as technical and tactical ability allows players to improve greatly in a
      shorter time. Small-sided games are a great way to train economically.
         Following is an example of how exercises from this book can be combined
      to create training sessions:
           Warm-up: speed, agility, and coordination circuit (see chapter 2)
           Speed, agility, and coordination exercises (chapter 2): Acceleration; Agility
             Ladder Work; Agility Running
           Passing and receiving exercises (chapter 5): Groups of Four; Four-Point
             Passing
           Attacking and defending exercise (chapter 7): 4v4 Square Possession
             With Bumpers
           Crossing and finishing exercises (chapter 8): Two-Goal Finishing; 2v2 to
             Two Goals
           Conditioning exercises (chapter 9): Group Sprints; 300-Yard Shuttle Run;
             1v1 Keep-Away
	Cooper Test                                                                        76


Purpose
Test and improve general fitness level.
Organization
Use an athletic track or full-size soccer field.
Procedure
Players should jog and stretch before undertaking the test. Players complete
eight full laps (2 miles, or 3.2 km) around the track, without stopping. Record
the finishing times for all players. The standard time for elite players to complete
the full eight laps is 12 minutes.
Key Point
Maintain a steady pace throughout the run.




                 XX
                 XX
               X X




                                                               CHAPTER 9   Conditioning   171
                    E4409/Matkovich/09.01/319809/TimB/R2-alw
      77                        Obstacle Fitness Test


      Purpose
      Test and improve the overall fitness level of elite players.
      Organization
      One full-size field. Set up the course as shown in the diagram.
      Procedure
      On your signal, players complete four consecutive laps around the course in
      12 minutes, as follows:
          1. Run forward to the first flag at the half line.
          2. Run backward to the next flag at the top of the penalty box.
          3. Run forward to the center circle cones.
          4. In the center circle, run forward throughout. Run to the center cone, out
             to the left, back to the center cone, forward to the top cone, back to center,
             out to the right, back to center, back to the starting cone.
          5. Run forward to the next flag, at the top corner of the field.
          6. After rounding the flag, run forward across the half line, doing a 360-degree
             spin at each of the cones along the way.
          7. Slalom through the flags.
          8. Run forward to the corner flag.
          9. Shuffle sideways facing the course to the flag at the top of the box.
         10. Shuffle sideways facing away from the course to the flag in the corner.
         11. Run forward jumping as if shooting a header at each of the three cones
             along the way.
         12. Run forward through the starting point.

      Key Point
      Maintain a steady pace throughout.
      Variations
        1. Players complete one lap as fast as they can, rest for one minute, then
           repeat, for a total of four runs.
        2. Set up the course on a half field; players should complete four laps in six
           minutes on the shortened field.




172      Elite Soccer Drills
  XXX




                                        ard
                                      rw
                         Forward
    Forward




                                   Fo
                     d
                 kwar
              Bac




      Jump header



      Jump header



      Jump header

                                    Sh
                  ffle                 uf
                                         fle
              Shu




E4409/Matkovich/09.02/319810/TimB/R2-alw




                                               CHAPTER 9   Conditioning   173
      78                            Group Sprints


      Purpose
      Improve anaerobic conditioning.
      Organization
      Mark two lines, 60 yards apart. Separate team into three groups, 1, 2, and 3.
      Group 1 starts on line A, group 2 starts on line B, and group 3 starts behind
      group 1 at line A.
      Procedure
      On your signal, the following occurs:
           1. Group 1 sprints across to line B.
           2. When the last player from group 1 crosses line B, group 2 sprints across
              to line A.
           3. When the last player from group 2 crosses line A, group 3 sprints across
              to line B.
           4. When the last player from group 3 crosses line B, group 1 sprints back
              across to line A.
           5. Groups continue until each group has completed 10 sprints across.
           6. Players rest for two minutes. Mark two lines 20 yards apart.
           7. Have groups repeat the procedure until each group has completed 15
              sprints across.
           8. Players rest for two minutes. Mark two lines 10 yards apart.
           9. Have groups repeat the procedure until each group has completed 20
              sprints across.

      Key Points
        • Sprint through each line.
        • Encourage your teammates throughout.

      Variations
        1. Increase or decrease the line distance.
        2. Increase or decrease the number of sprints each player must complete.




174      Elite Soccer Drills
3 1                                                                       2

3 1                                                                       2

3 1                                                                       2

3 1                                                                       2

3 1                                                                       2

3 1                                                                       2

  A                                                                   B
                         60 yards




      E4409/Matkovich/09.03a/319811/TimB/R2-alw




                                                  CHAPTER 9   Conditioning    175
      79                       300-Yard Shuttle Run


      Purpose
      Test and improve the anaerobic fitness levels of elite players.
      Organization
      Mark a starting line and place cones at 10-, 20-, 30-, 40-, and 50-yard intervals.
      Procedure
      On your command, players sprint:
           1. Out to the 10-yard marker and back
           2. Out to the 20-yard marker and back
           3. Out to the 30-yard marker and back
           4. Out to the 40-yard marker and back
           5. Out to the 50-yard marker and back
         Players should complete the run in approximately 45 seconds. Players com-
      plete five runs, resting for one minute between runs.
      Key Points
        • Maintain a high sprint pace throughout.
        • Control your breathing, stand upright, and continue moving during rest
          intervals.
        • Encourage your teammates throughout the run.

      Variations
        1. Increase or decrease the number of total sprints.
        2. Increase or decrease the amount of rest time between sprints.
        3. Have players juggle during their rest times.




176      Elite Soccer Drills
 X          X               X              X                    X




10 yards




           20 yards




                           30 yards




                                         40 yards




                                                           50 yards




                E4409/Matkovich/09.04/319841/TimB/R2-alw




                                                    CHAPTER 9       Conditioning   177
      80                 120-Yard Sprint and Recovery Run


      Purpose
      Improve anaerobic fitness level and recovery time.
      Organization
      One full-size field (120 yards long), or a field space 120 yards long.
      Procedure
      Players start on the end line. On your signal, they have 15 seconds to sprint
      to the other end line. Players then have 45 seconds to jog back to the starting
      line. Have them continue until they have completed 10 sprints and 10 jogs in
      10 minutes.
      Key Points
        • Control breathing when jogging.
        • Encourage teammates throughout the run.

      Variations
        1. Increase or decrease the number of sprints.
        2. Increase the amount of time players have to sprint from one end to the
           other.
        3. Increase the recovery run time.




178      Elite Soccer Drills
              X




   X
15-second sprint




                                                      120 yards
                   45-second jog




                   X




           E4409/Matkovich/09.05/319844/TimB/R3-alw




                                                       CHAPTER 9   Conditioning   179
      81                                    1v1 Keep-Away


      Purpose
      Improve overall fitness with the ball.
      Organization
      Mark a 30-  30-yard grid. In the grid, players get into pairs, with one ball
      between them.
      Procedure
      On your signal, each pair plays 1v1 Keep-Away within the grid. Players attempt
      to steal from their partners and retain possession. Pairs play for one-minute
      intervals and then rest and switch partners. Players play 10 rounds.
      Key Point
      Recover when in possession of the ball.
      Variations
        1. Pairs play for 30-second intervals.
        2. Players have a 30-second rest and recovery time.
        3. Players play for five rounds.


                                                30 yards




                                X
                                    O
                                                           X
                                                               O




                                                                          30 yards
                                        X   O
                                                               X   O




                                                 X   O




                               E4409/Matkovich/09.06/319846/TimB/R2-alw
180      Elite Soccer Drills
                           15-Second Sprints	                                   82


Purpose
Improve recovery time and overall conditioning.
Organization
Mark two lines, 60 yards apart. Players start on line A.
Procedure
On your command, players sprint to line B and back to line A in 15 seconds.
Players then rest for 30 seconds, repeat the sprint, and rest again, continuing
until they have completed eight runs.
Key Point
Control your breathing during recovery.
Variations
  1. Increase sprint time to 20 seconds.
  2. Increase recovery time to one minute.
  3. Increase or decrease total runs to make the exercise more or less demand-
     ing.


         A       X     X     X      X     X      X     X




                                                                60 yards




         B




               E4409/Matkovich/09.07/319847/TimB/R2-alw

                                                           CHAPTER 9   Conditioning   181
      83                              Fartlek Runs


      Purpose
      Improve general and anaerobic endurance.
      Organization
      Players use a full-size soccer field or an open area.
      Procedure
      Players jog for 10 minutes to warm up and then do the following on your com-
      mand:
           1. Jog for 60 seconds.
           2. Run at three-quarter pace for 90 seconds.
           3. Jog for 45 seconds.
           4. Sprint for 10 seconds.
           5. Jog for 30 seconds.
           6. Run backward for 30 seconds.
           7. Walk for 30 seconds.
           8. Run at three-quarter pace for 60 seconds.
           Have players repeat the sequence four times.
      Key Points
        • Control your breathing throughout.
        • Encourage your teammates throughout.

      Variations
        1. Increase or decrease the amount of time each step is performed.
        2. Increase or decrease the number of repetitions.




182      Elite Soccer Drills
                                     Sprint                     Jog
                                 (10 seconds)              (45 seconds)



        Jog
   (30 seconds)
                                                                 3/4-pace run
                                                                 (90 seconds)
               Start
                                   Jog
                              (60 seconds)


Run backward
(30 seconds)




                   Walk
               (30 seconds)




                                                  3/4-pace run
                                                  (60 seconds)




                                                  Repeat 3 to 4 times




                       E4409/Matkovich/09.08/319849/TimB/R3-alw




                                                            CHAPTER 9   Conditioning   183
  About the Authors


Mike Matkovich joined the coaching staff of Chivas USA as the assistant
coach in February 2008. A veteran of American soccer and founder of Chi-
cago Magic soccer club, one of the most successful youth soccer clubs in the
United States, Matkovich has coached at every level of the U.S. game, work-
ing with youth, high school, college, amateur, and professional teams.
   Before joining Chivas USA, Matkovich served as an assistant coach for
Toronto FC, an MLS team, during the team’s inaugural campaign in Major
League Soccer in 2007. Earlier, Matkovich served as director of Chicago
Magic for 17 years. Under his tutelage the Magic was named Soccer Amer-
ica’s No. 1 Boys Club in the nation in 2004, 2005, and 2006. While with the
Magic, Matkovich was named National Coach of the Year and Regional
Coach of the Year by the National Soccer Coaches Association of America,
and the Illinois Coach of the Year by the Illinois Youth Soccer Association.
Matkovich also served as an assistant coach of the Chicago Power of the
indoor National Professional Soccer League from 1990 to 1994, where he
won a national championship in 1990. He spent 2000 to 2006 at the helm of
the Chicago Fire reserves of the Premier Development League, where he
amassed a 71-8-7 record, which gave him the highest winning percentage
of any coach in PDL history. A member of the U.S. national coaching staff,
Matkovich holds a national A license from the USSF and has been a member
of the NSCAA since 1992.

After a standout youth soccer career, Jason Davis helped the University
of Akron win three conference championships. After college, Jason played
professionally for the Pittsburgh Stingers, Detroit Neon, and Detroit Safari
of the Continental Indoor Soccer League (CISL). While playing profession-
ally, he began coaching local youth teams and decided to pursue coaching
as a full-time career. Davis has coached at the club level for the Michigan
Wolves-Hawks, Michigan Metrostars, and Vardar soccer clubs. He has also
served as the director for the Michigan Metrostars and the Vardar Boys and
Vardar Academy. He holds a USSF A license as well as the USSF national
youth license and is a state and regional head coach for Michigan and the
Region 2 Olympic development program.


                                                                               185
You’ll find other outstanding soccer resources at
    http://soccer.humankinetics.com
          In the U.S. call 1-800-747-4457
     Australia 08 8372 0999 • Canada 1-800-465-7301
Europe +44 (0) 113 255 5665 • New Zealand 0064 9 448 1207


              HUMAN KINETICS
              The Premier Publisher for Sports & Fitness
              P.O. Box 5076 • Champaign, IL 61825-5076 USA
