Developing Skill: A Guide to 3v3 Soccer Coaching
                                       *
                                Peter Prickett
                                       *
                          [Smashwords Edition]
                                       *




                                       *


Published in 2018 by Dark River, an imprint of Bennion Kearny.
Copyright © Dark River 2018
ISBN: 978-1-911121-51-0
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or
otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated without the
publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that it
which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition
being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
Dark River has endeavoured to provide trademark information about all the
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of
capitals. However, Dark River cannot guarantee the accuracy of this
information.
Published by Dark River, an imprint of Bennion Kearny Limited, 6
Woodside, Churnet View Road, Oakamoor, Staffordshire, ST10 3AE
www.BennionKearny.com
Many thanks to Garth Smith for his fantastic cover design.
Table of Contents

  Title Page
  BazookaGoal and 3v3 UK
  1: A Starting Point
  2: Warming Up
    Square 1 – Criss Cross
    Square 2 – Lofted Passes
    Square 3 – Over Under
    Square 4 – Dribbling
    Square 5 – Synchronisation
    Square 6 – Face Off
    Square 7 – Knock It Down
    Square 8 – Combinations 1
    Square 9 – Combinations 2
    Square 10 – Rotation
    Square 11 – Long Passes
    Square 12 – Mini Rondo
  3: 1v1
    1 – Columns
    2 – Quick Turns
    3 – Beating an Opponent - Face to Face
    4 – Beating an Opponent - Diagonal
    5 – Facing Multiple Opponents
    6 – Angled Goals
    7 – Reversed Goals
    8 – Transition 1
    9 – Through The Gate
    10 – When to Shoot?
  11 – Man Marked 1
  12 – Man Marked 2
  13 – Combining
  14 – Running on to the Ball
  15 – Transition 2
  16 – One vs the Goalkeeper
  17 – Gauntlet
  18 – Give and Go
  19 – Space to Shoot
  20 – Dribbling Cores
  21 – Loose Ball Battle
  22 – Cutting In
  23 – Transition 3
  24 – Side to Side
  25 – Multiplayer 1v1
  26 – Knock It Over
  27 – Goal to Goal
4: Why 3v3?
  Defensive Shapes
  Attacking Shapes
  Patterns of Play
  1 – Small-Sided Free Play
  2 – Four Goal Game
  3 – Target Players
  4 – Two vs Two plus Two
  5 – Four vs Two Possession
  6 – Support Players
  7 – In Zones - Vertical
  8 – Midfielder Game
  9 – Midfielder Game 2
  10 – One Touch Finish
  11 – One Touch Finish 2
  12 – Three Player Transition
  13 – End Zones
  14 – Diamond Shooting
  15 – Ice Hockey
  16 – Reversed Goals
  17 – Attacking Wave 1
  18 – Attacking Wave 2
  19 – Attacking Wave 3
  20 – Attacking Wave 4
  21 – Attacking Wave 5
  22 – Counter-Punch
  23 – Recovery Runs
  24 – Forward Passes, Forward Movement
  25 – Press
  26 – Press and Cover
  27 – Bounce Passers
  28 – Wide Rotation
  29 – Splitting Passes
  30 – Killer Moment
  31 – First to Four
  32 – Magic Square
  33 – Defend The Middle
  34 – Through The Gates 3v3
  35 – Quick Transitions
5: Breaking The Rules
  1 – 3v3 Waves + Goalkeepers
  2 – Forward Runs
  3 – Overloaded Attacks
  4 – Overloaded Attacks 2
  5 – Spatial Awareness
  6 – One vs One in the Middle
  7 – Link with Wide Players
  8 – Back to back + 3
6: Pitch Types
  1 – Regulation Football Pitch
  2 – Offset Goals
  3 – Four-Goal Game
  4 – Six-Goal Game
  5 – Goals on All Sides
  6 – Back to Back Goals
  7 – End Zones
  8 – Reversed Goals with End Zones
  9 – Horizontal Thirds
  10 – Magic Box
  11 – Vertical Thirds
  12 – Corners
  13 – Central Area
  14 – Diamond Pitch
  15 – Quartered Pitch
  16 – Horizontal Quarters with Four Goals
  17 – Circular Pitch
  18 – Wide Channels
7: A Practical Conclusion
Other Books from Bennion Kearny
                 BazookaGoal and 3v3 UK
This book is supported by BazookaGoal and 3v3 UK.
                         1: A Starting Point
What do we love about football?
This question is short and simple but has myriad possible answers.
There are core and key overall aspects. Competition, glory, drama,
storytelling, teamwork, artistry, and skill. As fans, there are two things that
we want, victory and entertainment. Sometimes, one without the other is not
enough. Teams can achieve genuine (or relative) success yet have an unhappy
fan base because they have not witnessed a style of football that thrills them.
The greatest players are those who provide entertainment and excitement. It
may manifest in different ways, but it is near universal that onlookers will be
enraptured by moments of high quality. The higher the quality they see, the
higher the entertainment levels. This then produces moments that last forever
and keep fans glued to the sport.
Football is filled with contradictions. One of these is that a great team needs
great individuals from whom great quality derives. Every link in the chain
needs to be strong, while some individuals may emerge to be stronger than
others. Between 2008 and 2018, the world has been enthralled by the
collective play of Barcelona. Their wonderful tiki-taka style of pass and
move football often requires no more than one or two touches, yet each of
those touches needs to be a work of craftsmanship. Such a high quality of
team play is only possible because of the outstanding quality of each player.
Barcelona have had one other thrilling aspect to their football. Although
managers might have come and gone, one player has been constant through
this period – Lionel Messi. At Barcelona, he has been the ultimate individual
within the team. The player with such pure quality that fast passing is no
problem, and neither is dribbling past two or three players. Nor striking
spectacularly from long-range or drawing in several opponents before
releasing the perfect pass. We love the team, but we also love the individual.
Messi and Barcelona are not the only great individual and team to grace the
game of football. During this period, there has been the fascinating duel
between Messi and Ronaldo, sparking the never-ending debate about who is
better. Or who is the greatest? Is either of these players superior to the
legends of the past? Pele, Maradona, Cruyff, Di Stéfano, or any others people
choose to bring into the conversation. Each of these players had the quality,
skill, decision making, and imagination to execute consistently and – most
importantly perhaps – during the big moments. This ultimately is what
coaches want for each of their young players. Can we somehow create the
environment and practices that will give players the opportunity to develop
top-level attributes?
It is grossly unrealistic to expect every young player to develop in this way,
but unless we give them the chance, we will never know if they can. As
coaches, we have limited time with our players, and that will always be an
obstacle. More than that, no matter how much time we actually do have, we
will always wish for more. The required abilities of a top level player form
a very lengthy list.




(From the England DNA)
This many areas are daunting and need distilling. Time is going to dictate
how much effect a coach can have on these areas. Sessions per week, and
minutes per session, increase incrementally as young players and coaches
move up the stages from grassroots to academy. In the main, coaches at all
levels will be able to most affect technical, tactical and psychological
outcomes at any level.
To my mind, the key to hitting such heights is what a player is capable of with
the ball. The ball and the player need to form a deeply satisfying long-term
relationship. One in which the player has full command of everything that the
ball does. The player should be able to demand that the ball momentarily
appears to defy physics and behave in a manner unexpected to their
opponent. Immense amounts of practice are required, and many coaches
assign time during training to this, but it takes more. Huge numbers of hours
spent between a child and a ball are needed to perfect, refine, and
experiment, in a quest to find their preferred moves.
It all starts with the ability to dribble. A ‘dribble first’ mindset will pay big
dividends in the long term. Players need to see an opponent and feel
confident that they can take that player on. If they have been brought up as a
passer, they will only ever pass when they see an opponent, eventually
panicking when one comes too close. When a dribbler sees pressure (and an
opponent), the mindset is different. This is not to panic; this is opportunity.
When they get older, it is easier to teach a player who dribbles too much to
pass than it is to teach a passer to become a dribbler.
The great dribblers are the players who best fulfil what we love about
football. These players represent the footballer we are in our dreams. The
ability to deceive and outmanoeuvre their opponent with shifts of the ball,
jinks of the body, and astounding balance. Such entertainers are not the
reserve of trophy-laden teams only. Such exciting dribblers can bring joy to
teams with average results. In the Premier League alone, we have seen
Juninho, Ginola, and Kinkladze bewitch with their ball playing ability, even
though their teams did not achieve great results. A lack of any ‘end product’
is often levelled at football’s dribblers but their tricks and skills are a device
to create space and openings; once those are created, they are then judged on
the shot, pass, or cross. What is often forgotten is that teams need players to
have the ability to create those openings in the first place!
To get here, we need 1v1. If we are going to master the ball, we need to
practise it against an opponent to achieve our dribbling mindset. If we work
on ball mastery, and always move straight into situations where it will not be
used, then an opportunity is wasted. 1v1s may occur in games where we have
overloaded attacking situations, but fast passing outcomes are far more
likely. Playing 1v1, there is no escaping it – players need to dribble. Players
need to face up to, and face off against, other players. Both as attackers and
defenders. Defending against your immediate opponent is just as important as
attacking. If a player cannot defend one on one, they will be picked out. They
will be the link in the chain that opponents exploit. It will no longer be 5v5
or 11v11; the game will be 4v5 or 10v11. Not all evenly numbered match ups
are equal.
1v1 setups need to be varied in order to replicate the conditions of the game.
Not all one on one situations in a game will be face to face. Some will be
with an opponent immediately behind, some will have the opponent coming
in from the side, some will be against a goalkeeper rather than against a
defender. This variation will increase the number of decisions a player needs
to make, and the constraints they need to deal with. Should they accelerate off
their first touch to escape through a gate in front of them? Do they twist and
turn until they can get the defender off balance and can escape through a side
gate? Or can they shift the ball enough to create the opportunity to shoot? The
decisions affecting the attacker will also affect the defender; we will
sometimes put the defender in a situation that does not favour them, but the
opposite can also be true.
For a book about 3v3, this is a lot of discussion about 1v1 being vital to the
game. If 1v1 is so important, why don’t we focus on that? Because there is
one key decision missing from 1v1. The decision to pass. The absence of this
possibility removes a number of actions from the dribbler’s arsenal. As well
as simply being able to pass, the player is unable to fake to pass. If there are
no teammates to pass to, why would a defender believe the action to fake
pass? Similarly, if the set up does not involve goals, why would the defender
buy a fake shot? We want the player to focus on how to take on an opponent,
but the realism eventually needs to come in.
The logical progression is into 2v2 and usually onto 4v4 and 5v5.
Which is what I used to do. I even designed numerous practices for this.
After a few weeks working on 2v2s, I felt there were certain problems. The
2v2 situations were just not dynamic enough. The game was mostly played in
a flat line. Sometimes in an offset line. There was very little opportunity to
make effective runs off the ball, and simple man-to-man defending worked
the majority of the time. An extra player was required to create a more
dynamic and realistic environment.
Any child will tell you that with three players a triangle can easily be
created. When it comes to passing the football, a triangle is the optimal shape
(arguably a diamond is, depending on whether a coach sees a diamond as a
diamond or as two triangles). The player on the ball has two options,
immediately creating more possible movements for attackers and more
challenging situations for defenders. An element of choosing a formation can
be introduced simply by moving the points of the triangle. Should a team
defend with two points closest to their goal or with one? What difference
does that make to the opposition? It is the same position for attackers. Do we
push two players high and wide or push just one up high acting as a centre-
forward? These choices will then affect the actions of the game. In one case,
we might see more up, back, and through actions. In another, more overlaps
could be possible. The set up now gives attacking players lines to break
through with a dribble or pass that did not previously exist in a 2v2.
These advantages over 2v2 are also true of 4v4 and 5v5. My experiences
have shown that even in 4v4s and 5v5s, certain young players do not get a
significant number of touches of the ball. By playing 3v3, players will
receive more touches than in 4v4 and 5v5 but fewer than 1v1 and 2v2.
However, they will be able to achieve a greater number of technical and
tactical decisions than within the 1v1 and 2v2 environments. Within a 3v3
game, those 1v1 and 2v2 situations will occur with regularity. Not only that,
there will be 1v0 situations where a player receives the ball under no
pressure. There will be 2v1 attacking overloads, 1v2 defending overloads,
3v1 attacking overloads, 1v3 defending overloads, 3v2 attacking overloads
and 2v3 defending overloads. There will be a greater number of
opportunities to dribble but also decisions on whether to pass, shoot, or
dribble. This is football. The game is fluid and rarely is it genuinely 11v11.
The immediate actions of the game usually take place within a small space. If
a photo was taken and cropped, the actions in that space would look a lot
like a small sided game. By playing 3v3, we are helping to prepare players
for the variable small moments of the larger game.
On a practical level, I have found it easier to plan for 3v3-based sessions
than for 4v4 or 5v5. The general guideline is for 16 players per coach. That
is a maximum which would provide two 4v4 games. It is a maximum though,
not a minimum. Many coaches of young players will not have squads of that
size. I have found it easier to plan for 2x3v3 and scale up, changing one 3v3
into a 4v4 or just adding a player to make 3v3+1 (magic man/joker), than to
make 4v4 practices and scale down.
As coaches, we are always looking for ways to get the most out of the time
that we spend with our players. We want players to have the capability to
take people on and win games on their own but at the same time to be able to
combine and attack with fluency. They also have to be able to defend, to drop
off, and pick the right moment to go in and pressure hard. If players are
capable on the ball, this all becomes easier. Give them the most touches you
can while still creating football-based decisions.
Using the setup described in this book, I hope to help create an environment
in which players can become masters of the ball and masters of decision
making. Where players can develop a great tactical understanding while
developing their technical ability. Players who can play with freedom but
also make choices based on ingrained knowledge of the game that they are
playing. Can we develop the modern footballer using the 3v3 principles
while still allowing them to play?
I believe we can.
                           2: Warming Up
People can tie themselves in knots when it comes to the warm-up. The warm-
up before the session, and the warm-up before the game, are different
propositions. Before the game, it is most important to find a routine.
Something that is consistent and which triggers the process in players’ minds
that they are about to play a match. The older the players are, the more
important this becomes. With young players, there is no problem warming up
for a game by playing a game.
Debates rage about the importance of a ‘physical’ warm-up. Young players
are very unlikely to pull muscles. For them, getting into a game groove is the
priority before a game. This will generally mean lots of touches, movement,
and finding game speed. Older players are likely to need some form of
dynamic stretching and movement but they also have to get enough touches
and game-based actions to ready themselves for competition.
At a session, this changes, although – once again – there is no problem in
starting off with a match for children. Kids do not warm-up before they play
a game during lunch break. I am yet to see a school kid pull a muscle at break
time.
The game may be a beginning for the session, or another type of exercise may
suit the needs of a certain set of players. From the game, there will need to be
a transition into the main body of the session. The problem that often faces
coaches is just how to get started. Which element to focus on during the
warm-up, and how much space the warm-up takes up. If a warm-up space
needs to be cleared before the main session can begin, this can eat into
precious time and cause confusion.
The square is a simple set up that requires only four cones and anything from
one to five balls. Variations can accommodate two to five players (though it
is possible for one player to perform dribbling moves or keep-ups in the
square while waiting for others to arrive). The players can organise this
themselves when they arrive at training and add their own twist to the
exercises.
From a minimal setup, a session can be pushed towards whatever topic the
coach desires. Time can be spent developing the technical base of the players
or moving straight into more competitive situations. If the players become
familiar with the setup, they can choose their activity and take ownership of
their own development. All from an initial four cones.



Square 1 – Criss Cross




1. Pass across.
2. Move to touch the cone to your left after passing, return to the centre,
receive the pass, pass again then touch the cone to the right. Return to the
centre and repeat.
3. Check away from the middle to receive the pass at the corner, return to the
middle after passing. Alternate corners.
4. From the centre, take a first touch towards the cone before passing. (First
touch with inside foot, outside foot, sole, chop, etc.).
5. Control the ball with one foot and pass with the other.
6. Roll with the sole with the sole from one foot to the other before passing.



Square 2 – Lofted Passes




1. Throw the ball across to your teammate to control (chest, thigh, instep,
etc.).
2. Chip/scoop the ball to your partner to control.
3. Create a pass where it is all performed in one movement (scoop, flick
pass, drag lace pass).
4. Headers across the square.
5. Headers around the square, keeping the ball up.
6. Header wars – Treat your line as a goal to protect. Throw the ball up in
the air to try to head past your partner, or head their attempt straight back at
goal.
Square 3 – Over Under




1. Both players, in their pair, have a ball. They pass on the ground to each
other at the same time.
2. Both players have a ball. One passes low, the other scoops the ball over
that pass.
3. Both players have a ball. One passes low, the other flicks the ball up and
volleys it over the low pass.



Square 4 – Dribbling
1. Mirror, mirror. Copy your partner’s dribbling moves as you both dribble
from side to side.
2. Dribble towards the right-hand cone. Perform a turning move or change of
direction move (chop, drag back, foot roll, etc.) to return to the centre. Then
dribble out to the left-hand cone and turn.
3. While dribbling out to the side cones, perform toe taps (or an alternative
movement) before dribbling to the next cone.
4. All four players dribble towards the centre of the square at the same time.
Break away to the right-hand cone. Perform a move as you break away (step
over, 360, drag push, etc.)
5. When all four players meet in the middle turn right (inside cuts, outside
cuts, etc.). Ensure this is also done to the left.



Square 5 – Synchronisation
1. One ball is being kept up around the square. Increase the number of balls
being kept up as the players improve.
2. One ball is passed around the square from left to right. This should be
passed two-touch to practice the action of opening out the body. Try to switch
the ball from one foot to the other for faster passes. Increase the number of
footballs to challenge synchronisation.
3. As above but chipping/scooping the ball around the square.
4. Switch direction on the coach’s call/signal. The players could give the
signal or call themselves.



Square 6 – Face Off
1. One versus one. One pair passes across the square to their partner. In the
other pair, one player dribbles across the square and scores a point if they
get past their opponent and over the line. If the defender wins the ball, attack
the opponent’s line for a point.
2. One versus three. The player with the ball can escape out of the square
past any of the three opponents. Start with the player in the middle.
3. One versus three tag. All players have a ball. The nominated player goes
into the middle and can escape through any side, including the one they just
vacated. Outside players must dribble with the ball to block the escape. They
may tag the player as he tries to escape.



Square 7 – Knock It Down
1. Knock the ball off the cone in the middle with a pass. Two players (e.g.
white shirts) work together as a team. The two striped players also work as a
team. Each team has their own ball. Score a point each time the ball is
knocked off the cone. First to x number of points wins.
2. Chip the ball over the ball on the cone. Score a point each time the ball
clears the ball on the cone and reaches your partner.



Square 8 – Combinations 1
A midfielder passing exercise. The central player needs to check his/her
shoulders and observe the movement around him.
a. Player 1 passes to the middle player. They play a 1-2 and player 1 arrives
with the ball at the next cone.
b. Player 2 passes to player 3 who then plays a 1-2 with the middle player
and arrives at the next cone.
c. Player 1 passes to player 2 who then plays a 1-2 with the middle player
and arrives at the next cone.
The exercise continues in a cycle before the middle player is swapped.



Square 9 – Combinations 2
1. Five players. Pass the ball, follow. Pass along the floor. One or two touch
play. Encourage players to make double movements away from the cone
before receiving.
2. Play a 1-2 before setting the ball to the next passer.
3. Play the longer of the passes in the air.
4. Following the 1-2 pass, the ball must go diagonally across the area in an
‘up back and through’ style.



Square 10 – Rotation
1. Simple rotation. 1 passes to 2. 2 sets back inside for 1 who passes to 3. 2
takes the position of 1. 1 takes the position of 2. Repeat in the opposite
direction.
2. Play one touch.
3. Play with the ball in the air.



Square 11 – Long Passes
1. Long distance passing. The ball needs to travel through the square on the
way to your partner.
2. The ball needs to clear the square before reaching your partner.
3. Your partner runs into the square to receive the ball, then passes it back
(coordinate between the pairs, run backwards out of the square).
4. One ball only. Run into the square and then lay off first time to either of the
two players who did not play the ball in. If the pass is lofted, this lay off
could be a volley or header.



Square 12 – Mini Rondo
1. Simple rondo. Movement to fill the empty side and keep the ball away
from the player in the middle.
2. If there are five players, fill each side and play one touch.
                                    3: 1v1
The beginning of everything.
Repetition is generally ill-advised unless it is required to push on a key
point. In this case, I must repeat myself because (to my mind) everything
begins with one specific thought process.
Dribbling is a mindset. It is a mindset that is learned early on in a player’s
football life. The shouts from coaches and parents to “pass”, “shoot”, or “get
rid” all discourage the dribbler. The calls erode the mindset… often before it
has even begun to form.
It is easier to teach a dribbler to pass when they get older than it is to teach a
passer to dribble when they are older.
If a young player always looks to pass after they receive the ball, their
response to seeing pressure from an opponent will be to try to give the ball to
someone else. If a young player always looks to dribble after they receive the
ball, they will respond to pressure from an opponent by attempting to go past
that opponent. Or opponents, plural. Although this chapter is about one
versus one, in the reality of the game there will be situations where a
dribbler is one versus two, three, four or five players – particularly if the
opposition are in a deep defensive set up. When teams “park the bus”,
exceptional dribblers hold the key to unlocking the defence and breaking
through the lines.
If a player does not have the mindset that an opponent is something to relish
(rather than someone to fear) they will not be able to dribble. The idea of
potential reward for beating an opponent should far outweigh the possible
risks of losing possession. Much of that comes from the environment that the
player develops in. Are they told to pass all the time? Is the play always one
and two touch? Are children criticised and labelled for being greedy ball
hogs? Or are they encouraged to express themselves – to show their abilities
and be free to experiment on the pitch? After all, it is only a game of
children’s football.
The benefits to having multiple players who are comfortable one versus one
(or against greater odds) really start to show when the players begin to
mature. If every player is competent defending one on one, a team will be
able to defend with solidity. If a number of players on a team are excellent
when taking on defenders that is when real advantages are created. In June
2017, France defeated England in a friendly at the Stade de France, 3-2.
France had a player sent off but were still able to attack very effectively. The
reason for this was that they had Ousmane Dembélé, Kylian Mbappé,
Thomas Lemar and Paul Pogba; all players with wonderful dribbling ability.
Not all one versus ones are equal. When the attacker is superior to the
defender, a one versus one becomes an attacking overload. France effectively
had four overloads despite being a player down.
How many overloads can a team create? If France started the game with four
exceptional one versus one players, they were effectively playing 15v11.
What if a team has six exceptional players? Are we playing 17v11? Where
does this stop? In a way, it stops before it even begins because there is only
one ball. Football is not 11v11 for the player on the ball, it is likely to be
1v1, 1v2, 1v3, 2v1, 3v1, 2v2 and so forth because the ball is only really
being affected by what is happening in the close vicinity. The effect of being
superior – one against one – is less that of an overload and more that of an
elimination. With each player, the dribbler passes their influence on, and the
immediate action of the game is taken away. Turning a 1v3 into a 1v2 into a
1v1 and into 1v0. This is particularly useful when we have players who are
capable of dribbling from deep positions and breaking through defensive
lines. Gerard Piqué, Franz Beckenbauer, and Alan Hansen were fantastic at
taking the ball from their defensive zones past the opposition forwards, then
the midfielders, and encroaching on the opposition defence, creating not only
chances but panic. Midfielders and forwards who can outplay their
immediate foe are highly prized and end up with legendary status, especially
in our multimedia world where flashes of skill are preserved forever.
Children adore these moments. They are inspired by these moments, and they
want to replicate these moments. Dribbling is about more than being effective
with the ball. Being able to manipulate the ball at will is a wonderful boost
to the self-esteem of young footballers. Being that little bit closer to their
heroes and having the ability to produce the same skill or trick that the
greatest player in the world does is an enormous boost. When they can
constantly replicate that move in match situations, an entirely new level is
reached. One where confidence, competence, self-esteem, and effectiveness
are all heightened.
To help children get their moves match-ready, we need to give them one
versus one situations within their sessions. Ball mastery and technical
exercises are fantastic, but we need to apply full pressure at some point. That
pressure is not just face to face but comes from behind and from the side as
well. If we can ensure that then our young players are being given the
opportunity, they can become one versus one masters, with and without the
ball.



1 – Columns




1. The first player passes across to their partner who attacks them, looking to
create enough space to score in the mini goal. If the defender wins the ball,
they can score in their opponent’s mini goal.
2. Alternatively, the player with the ball has the target of crossing the
defender’s end line or stopping the ball on the line.
3. Progress to 2v2 to introduce basic combination play and more convincing
feints. The defenders also have the opportunity to practice communication.



2 – Quick Turns




1. The defender passes the ball across to the attacker to start the practice.
The attacker can gates close to the mini goal. If the defender wins the ball,
they score in either of the mini goals. Encourage twisting and turning
combined with sharp acceleration.
Alternatives
- No gates. Encourage a good first touch and fast, accurate finishing.
- No mini goals. Move the cones into the position of the goals. Players score
a point by passing through the gates.



3 – Beating an Opponent - Face to Face




1. White passes to stripe. Stripe tries to score in either of the mini goals at
the white team’s end. If white win the ball, they can attack the mini goals at
stripe’s end. This practice is face to face; encourage fake shots and change of
direction moves with fast acceleration. Do the attackers have to go past the
defender to score or do they just need to create enough space to shoot?
2. If the attacker loses the ball, the next player in the line can step in to
represent a covering defender. Should that player win the ball, launch a 2v1
attack.
4 – Beating an Opponent - Diagonal




1. White passes across to stripe. Stripe can score in either of the goals
marked B once they have entered or passed through the central square. If
white wins the ball, they can score in either of the goals marked A. Work on
developing an accurate long pass, good first touch, acceleration, and sharp
change of direction.
2. Remove the central square and add goalkeepers in front of each goal (two
from each team). These can also act as passing options, creating a 3v3.
3. Play 2v2 with the square still in.
4. Play 2v2 with goalkeepers.



5 – Facing Multiple Opponents
1. 1v1v1v1. Groups of players in each corner with cone goals. The coach
passes the ball into one of the players. It is useful to have criteria for
choosing who to pass to. That player can then score in any of the goals (apart
from his own). This could become a 1v1, 1v2 or 1v3 situation depending on
what the player with the ball decides to do, or what the players without the
ball decide to do. Do they press the ball? Do they stay on their line? Does the
dribbler immediately pick out an individual to attack?
2. Add goalkeepers.
3. Join two teams together. Stripes and black vs. white and green.



6 – Angled Goals
1. A striped player pass to white. There are two goals positioned at offset
angles. The player with the ball may score in either of the two goals. The two
defenders need to prevent the player from scoring. If the defender wins the
ball, they can score in either goal. The angle of the goals means that a good
first touch is vital, as is the ability to feint and quickly change direction.



7 – Reversed Goals
1. Stripe passes across to white. White can score in either goal. If the stripe
wins the ball, they may also score in either goal. The closest goal to the
player receiving is positioned the wrong way around, making it difficult to
score an easy goal. The player receiving the ball needs to use speed and
deception to score. The direction of the goals also affects the defender. It is
possible for the attacker to score with a quick shot into the far goal. If the
defender covers that goal quickly, they can score an easy goal themselves.
The defender needs to work out the best way to protect the goal and still be
able to apply pressure to the attacker.



8 – Transition 1
1. A striped player starts. The player with the ball drives forward and looks
to score in the mini goal immediately in front of them, but only after crossing
the four cone shooting line. As soon as the stripe crosses the line, a white
player attacks the goal in front of them. The stripe needs to react quickly after
shooting to defend the goal.
2. If the defending player wins the ball, they can score in either of the side
goals.
3. Instead of only scoring in the goal immediately in front, the attacking
player can attack either goal, thus getting the defender off balance with a
quick change of direction.



9 – Through The Gate
1. White passes to stripe. Stripe receives the ball and attacks any of the goals
marked A. The player can only score once they have dribbled through the
pair of gates in front of the goal. If white wins the ball, they can score in any
goal marked B.
2. Enforce a rule that if the player passes through the cones with the ball on
their left foot, it needs to be a left foot finish. If they pass through and the ball
is on their right, it needs to be a right foot finish.
3. Play 2v2. The goal can only be scored if the ball has passed through the
cones. This may be with a dribble, pass, or first touch.



10 – When to Shoot?
1. Stripe passes the ball to white. White attacks and scores a point by
knocking the ball off either corner cone at the stripe’s end. If stripe wins the
ball, they can score by knocking the ball off either corner cone at the white
team’s end.
2. Add a halfway line. If the attacking player crosses that line, they have the
option of turning and attacking any of the four footballs. Encourage turning,
changes of direction, acceleration, deception, and intelligence.



11 – Man Marked 1
1. Stripe passes the ball into his teammate inside the square. He is under
pressure from the white team defender who is also in the square. The aim is
for the striped player to get out of the square and knock off any of the balls on
cones. If the white player can win the ball, he can knock any of the balls off
the cones. Encourage the attacker to use their body and demand where they
want the pass. How can the attacker make it difficult for the defender to read
where he is going?



12 – Man Marked 2
1. Stripe passes to a teammate inside the square. The white defender applies
pressure to the stripe and tries to intercept or win the ball in a challenge.
Stripe is looking to spin or turn past the defender to then score in either of the
mini goals at the white team’s end. If the white wins the ball, they can attack
and score in either of the mini goals at the striped team’s end.
2. Progression. If the stripe turns the white defender, one of the white players
at the cone can step out to defend the mini goals. The turned defender can
also recover to create a 1v2. Encourage the attacker to finish the movement
quickly.



13 – Combining
1. Stripe 1 passes to white 1. White 1 sets the ball back to white 2. Stripe 2
moves off the line, and we have a 1v1 between white 1 and stripe 2. White
tries to score in either of the mini goals at stripe’s end. If stripe wins the ball,
he can score in either goal at the white end.
2. The player in possession can now choose to play a 1-2 with their
teammate at the side.
3. When player 1 receives, they can choose whether to set, or attack
themselves.
4. Play a 2v1 attack.
5. Play 2v1 with stripe 1 recovering onto the pitch to make a 2v2.



14 – Running on to the Ball
1. An attacker and defender begin on the same side of the area. Stripe 1 waits
for stripe 2 to make a move and then makes a pass. The white defender on the
side looks to mark the striped attacker. Play 1v1 with stripe able to score in
either of the white team’s goals. White can score in either striped goal if they
win the ball. Encourage movement to receive, forward passes, shielding, and
running with the ball.
2. After passing, stripe 1 joins the attack to create a 2v1.
3. The second white defender joins for a 2v2.



15 – Transition 2
1. Players have a ball each. White starts with the ball and attacks the left-
hand goal. Once they are through the three left-hand cone gates, they shoot
into an empty net. React, turn, and defend. As soon as white crosses through
the left-hand gates, stripe attacks the right-hand goal. Once they cross through
the right-hand gates, stripe can shoot. They then need to recover and defend
as white will set off once stripe passes through the gate. Should the defender
recover in time and win the ball, they can score in either of the goals at the
side.
2. Add goalkeepers.



16 – One vs the Goalkeeper
1. Stripe passes to stripe. White moves to close down the striped player
before they can shoot at goal. The stripe can take an early shot or try to get
closer to the goal before shooting. If they choose to get closer, they may have
to take on the defender. If the defender wins the ball, they score in the empty
goal. Next turn, white passes to white with a stripe closing down. Encourage
good first touches and a willingness to shoot with a non-dominant foot.



17 – Gauntlet
1. Simple 1v1. The white starts with the ball and dribbles against stripe 1. If
they pass stripe 1, they then take on stripe 2. If they get past stripe 2, they take
on stripe 3. If the defender wins the ball, switch places with the dribbler.



18 – Give and Go
1. Four players positioned around the outside. The two players in the middle
play 1v1 against each other on the inside. They use the outside players to
help them keep the ball. When a ball is played to an outside player, the
outside player needs to try to give the ball back to the player who initiated
the exchange. If a pass is not on the outside, players may play one pass to
another outside player, to change the angle. Use movement, shielding, and
dribbling skills to retain possession. Play for two minutes then switch the
middle players.



19 – Space to Shoot
1. Two players play 1v1 in each half. They look to receive passes from their
teammate after finding space to shoot. If they cannot find the space, they will
have to receive and then create their own space. If the shot is in, or pushed
behind by the goalkeeper, they look to receive another ball. If the shot is
saved and stays in play, the ball is live until it goes out of play. If the ball
goes off the pitch after touching a stripe, it is white ball and vice versa. If the
defending player gains possession, they may shoot. Each player receives a
maximum of four balls. Play until all the balls have been used.
2. Combine the two pitches and play 2v2 with players able to score in any
goal.
3. Make the practice directional so players can only score at one end.



20 – Dribbling Cores
1. Practice core dribbling moves plus 1v1. Both stripe and white dribble in
and out of the cones using different parts of the foot. When stripes reach the
end, they finish before turning to defend. When whites reach the end, they
spin and attack the goal now being defended by a stripe. If the stripe wins the
ball, they attack the opposite goal.



21 – Loose Ball Battle
1. The two groups align either side of a coach (or player). The coach passes
a ball into the middle. The first player from each group races to the ball to
see who gets there first. The player with the ball may score in either goal.



22 – Cutting In
1. White 1 passes to white 2 who cuts in for a 1v1 with the striped defender.
The stripe on the line with white 1 makes a recovery run to apply transition
pressure. White 2 can take the shot on quickly or attempt to beat the defender.
White 1 then takes the space vacated by white 2. The next pass from position
1 will be to white 3. Should the stripes win the ball, they have a 2v1 attack
into the mini goals.
2. White must get out of the box before shooting.
3. White must shoot inside the box.
4. White 1 joins the attack to create a 2v2 (when including the recovering
defender).
5. White 2 may pass to white 3 to create an attack. White 1 can also join to
create a 3v2.



23 – Transition 3
1. Stripe 1 starts with the ball. He plays a 1-2 with stripe 2 and shoots. As
soon as the shot is released, the white player attacks the two mini goals. The
player who shot has to recover and defend the two mini goals. White can
only shoot once past the three cones.
2. Both stripes defend the white player after the 1-2, rather than after the shot.



24 – Side to Side
1. Stripe and white have a ball at their feet standing at the gate. They perform
a move (toe taps, foot roll, etc.). On the coach’s call (“A” or “B”), the
players run with the ball to one of the side balls to see who can knock it off
first.
2. As above, but players leave their footballs in the goals and race to get a
side ball. The player with the ball tries to score in their opponent’s goal.



25 – Multiplayer 1v1
1. Stripe and white face each other 1v1. White can score by dribbling
through any grey gate. Stripe can score by dribbling through any black gate.
When a goal is scored, restart in the middle. The player who conceded is
now on the attack.



26 – Knock It Over
1. White dribbles forward a few steps before heeling the ball to stripe who
tries to knock over the cone. One point for knocking over a cone. Three
points for knocking the ball off the central cone.



27 – Goal to Goal
1. Stripe vs. white, 1v1 in the centre, to start. If the attacker beats the
defender, they are 1v1 with the sweeper keeper. If the sweeper keeper wins
the ball, then they are an attacker and may enter the central zone to create a
2v1 (or 2v0 if the player does not recover). If the 2v1 does not yield a goal,
the other sweeper keeper joins the attack to create a 2v2.
2. The team in possession attacks 2v1 with the goalkeeper fixed.
3. The team in possession attacks 2v1 with the forward fixed in the final
third.
                             4: Why 3v3?
Technical development cannot happen without the ball.
Although in the professional game, research shows that players are likely to
only have two to four minutes in possession, they must be able to maximise
that time with the ball – which means they must have been afforded the time
and opportunity to develop their technical actions during training. If our
young players spend only two minutes with the ball, during matches, for
example, then opportunities are being missed. The obvious answer is to
decrease the number of players on the field, during training, which means
coaches need to decide how small to make their matches.
In the last 50 years, 4v4 (no goalkeeper) and 5v5 (with a goalkeeper) have
been the most common small sided games used. Famously, in Dutch football,
4v4 has been their way. While Liverpool had their spell dominating English
football, the players were always asked, “What do you do in training?”. The
answer would always be, “We play 5-a-side”.
My belief is that when we develop our footballers, we should go smaller
still.




± Calculated on 2 sessions
Table taken from the paper, The Usefulness Of Small Sided Games Training,
by Filipe Manuel Clemente, Micael S. Couceiro, Fernando Manuel Lourenco
Martins and Rui Mendes.
The table above shows the number of technical actions per game when small-
sided games are used. The numbers, in general, are very similar. The
information not displayed is the number of actions per player but simple
maths can determine that six players having 31 involvements with the ball
will have around five involvements each, while ten players with 31
involvements/passes will have around three involvements each.




“An increase in the number of players performing led to an increase in the
total number of technical actions performed. However, the addition of extra
players also led to a decrease in the total number of technical actions
performed per player.” From Small Sided Games: The Physiological And
Technical Effect Of Altering Pitch Size And Player Numbers by Adam
Owen, Craig Twist and Paul Ford. (Graph and quote)
One versus one, and two versus two, encourage significantly more actions
per player than even three versus three. These formats lack important
elements from football, though. Which is not to say that they are without
benefit, particularly one versus one when used in conjunction with three
versus three.

Defensive Shapes
One defender lines of defence
             *




  Flat two lines of defence
              *
  Job and a half lines of defence
                 *




Defensive triangle lines of defence
                 *
       Defensive triangle (set for pressing) lines of defence
                                 *

Attacking Shapes




               Offensive triangle with one forward
                                 *
             Offensive triangle with two forwards
                               *




Offset offensive triangle with two in line and one high and wide
                                *
    Offset attacking triangle with two in line and one deep and wide
                                     *




   Offset offensive triangle with two deep and one very high and wide
                                     *

Patterns of Play
Crossover runs
      *




   One two
      *
Overlap
  *




Underlap
   *
  Third Man Run
        *




Up, back and through
         *
                                Set and spin
                                      *




                                  Rotation
                                      *
All of the above can also happen within 3v3, 4v4 and 5v5, but as previously
highlighted, we also want to optimise the number of individual technical
opportunities.
“Strategically, 3v3 football uses the smallest tactical unit able to apply the
principle of depth and breadth for effective team offence and defence.” From
Effective 3-A-Side Game Formats And Team Strategies For Advanced Level
by Harry Huball, Ian Franks, Mike Sweeney and Risto Pauppinen.
Each moment with the ball is a possible pass, dribble, or shot. The players
not on the ball will all have a strong chance of being involved in the next
game action. With young children, I have seen them have very few touches
even when playing 4v4 and 5v5. In 3v3 there is no place to hide. The ball
will eventually find you; then you need to decide what to do with it. Will you
accept the challenge in front of you and take it on? The desire is to have
players comfortable in 1v1, 1v2 and 1v3 situations – the 3v3 format of the
game creates these, allowing our young players to express themselves and be
creative. Will they decide that they are in a position to shoot? The pitch isn’t
that big, so perhaps the player can hone their finishing abilities and become
the goal scorer they have dreamed of being. Or will they spot the movement
of a teammate and play the killer pass? Can they master the assist because of
the options available in the 3v3 format?
It is my belief that by using 3v3, we will give our players their best
opportunity to have the freedom they need to discover who they are, and what
they can do, while still learning the core components of football. We give
them the chance to become outstanding ball players with good decision
making and game knowledge.
Horst Wein was a great proponent of the benefits of a 3v3 format for player
development. His ideas began in hockey before moving into football. Wein
emphasised the four goal (two per team) format and developed Funinho for
young players. This work builds upon the principles started by Horst Wein.
*It is worth noting that not all practices are precisely 3v3 and may be better
described as 6 player practices. These can easily transition into a 3v3 game.



1 – Small-Sided Free Play
Ensure that the pitch is small enough that the goalkeepers can shoot and be
involved in the general play.



2 – Four Goal Game
Encourage the use of space and increased opportunities to score.
Discourage players from just defending the goal (though let them try initially,
as it may create 1v1 situations).
Look for the players’ spacing and opportunities to switch play.



3 – Target Players
2v2 + 2.
A team scores a point each time they play into one of the end players. After
playing in, look to move and receive a pass. Turn and play into the target
player at the opposite end. Continue playing from end to end until the
opposition win possession.
Coaching Points
- Body shape
- Orientated first-touch
- Fast passing
- Movement to find space
- Types of move (1-2, overlap, up back and through, etc.)



4 – Two vs Two plus Two
The white team looks to play from target player to target player in order to
score points. If stripes win the ball, they can break away and score in either
of the two goals. The white team may try to win back possession.
After a set period of time, switch the team roles.
Coaching Points
- Passing
- Movement
- Set moves (1-2, overlap, etc.)
- Transition
- Counter-attack
- Running with the ball



5 – Four vs Two Possession
The players are in pairs so that if a player gives the ball away they, and their
partner, switch with the middle two players.
Coaching Points
- Fast passing (one- and two-touch)
- Quality of pass
- Small amounts of movement to create support and passing angles
- Teamwork and pressing from the middle two – do not allow a splitting pass



6 – Support Players
1v1 & 1v1 with two neutral players.
Two 1v1s take place simultaneously. The two neutral players can be used by
anyone who has possession.
The 1v1 starts after the player with the ball plays a 1-2 with a neutral player.
The neutral players could decide to both help the same player, creating 3v1
for one mini-game while the other mini-game stays at 1v1.
Coaching Points
- Dribbling moves
- Combinations
- Communication
- Awareness
- Movement
7 – In Zones - Vertical




Locked into zones.
Start with three x 1v1.
Progress to one ball with the players locked into their zones but able to score
in any goal.
How does this affect the way the players defend?
Allow attackers to follow their passes and create attacking overloads.
Attackers might even choose to follow the ball into the zone they passed into,
but make a run in behind.
Coaching Points
- Dribbling
- Finishing
- Combining
- Movement
8 – Midfielder Game




Two players from each team are locked into their half of the pitch. One
player from each team is free to move from zone to zone. They are the
midfielder, and they help with attacking and defending.
Coaching Points
- Decision making for the midfielder. Who to help? Where to support?
- Awareness
- Movement
- 1v1
- 2v1
- 2v2
- Cover and balance
9 – Midfielder Game 2




Two players from each team are locked into each half of the pitch. One
player from each team is allowed to move from half to half. They are the
midfielder and help with attacking and defending.
Progress to rotation. No player is fixed, but one player must remain in each
half at all times.
Coaching Points
- Decision making for midfielder
- Awareness
- Movement
- Communication



10 – One Touch Finish
The two central players face each other. They can score in any goal, but it
must be a one-touch finish following a pass from an outside player (outside
players have a two-touch maximum). If a player scores, they get another ball
until they miss or their opponent intercepts.
Coaching Points
- Movement
- Combination
- Finishing
- Decision making – When to pass? When to hold? When to dribble and why?



11 – One Touch Finish 2
Stripes can score in goal A or goal B.
Whites can score in goal C or goal D.
Players can score with a one-touch finish after passing to a teammate and
getting the return.
After a goal is scored, the player who didn’t score restarts with the ball.
Coaching Points
- Movement
- Combining
- Finishing



12 – Three Player Transition
The striped team attacks against the white team. As soon as the stripes lose
the ball, the white team attacks the black team. The stripes get off the pitch
and occupy the space on the line behind the goal which the whites had
initially defended.
If the white team win possession, the attack starts immediately. If the ball
leaves the pitch, the coach gives them a ball to start the attack. Allow the
teams to choose if they want to play with three outfield players when
defending, or two and a goalkeeper.
Progression
- If the attacking team scores, they get another attack and turn to attack the
opposite end. This continues until they lose the ball.
Coaching points
- Fast attacks
- Movement
- Support
- Finishing



13 – End Zones




To score a point, dribble into the opponent’s end zone or play a forward pass
for a teammate to run onto and receive in the end zone.
Coaching Points
- Movement
- Combination moves
- Dribbling/running with the ball
- Transition



14 – Diamond Shooting
Goal to goal.
Players are locked into their own half. All players can shoot.
Progression – allow one player from each half to enter the opposition’s half
with a dribble or from a forward pass.
Coaching Points
- Types of finish
- Shooting technique(s)
- Awareness of opposition positions and shooting opportunities



15 – Ice Hockey
Goals are positioned so that there is a good amount of space behind them.
Players are able to go behind the goals by dribbling or moving to receive.
Coaching Points
- Awareness of the positions of team mates relative to the goals
- Movement
- Lifted passes
- Through passes
- Creation of angles



16 – Reversed Goals
Goals and inside end zones. Players can make runs into the end zones to
receive and finish.
Progress to allow a recovering defender to enter the end zone. Another
player can enter the end zone after the pass to create a 2v1.
Alternatively, start with a player already in the end zone.
Coaching Points
- Movement
- Combination
- Finishing
- Support
- Killer passes



17 – Attacking Wave 1
3v0 attack playing one- and two-touch until a player finishes. Look to attack
smoothly.
Coaching points
- Fast passing
- Specific movements (overlaps, 1-2s, looping runs)



18 – Attacking Wave 2
Whites attack one end. Stripes attack the other end. Both attacks happen at the
same time. The two teams need to be aware of interference and play through,
and around, the other team.
Coaching Points
- Movement
- Fast passing
- Runs
- Support
- Awareness



19 – Attacking Wave 3
Player B passes to player A and then moves into a defensive position. The
attack is 2v1.
Both attacks happen at the same time.
When the attack is over, the players shift one position (A to B, B to C, C to
A).
Coaching Points
- Dribbling and running with the ball
- Combination play
- Forwards runs of decoy runs



20 – Attacking Wave 4
Three zones. One defender locked in each zone. The attackers play through
each zone to try to score. If a defender wins the ball, all three can attack the
goals behind the white players together.
Add a condition that each attacker must touch the ball at least once in each
zone before progressing.
Coaching points
- Combinations
- Triangles
- Movement
- Patience
- Defenders positioning and covering



21 – Attacking Wave 5
3v1 attack. If the defender wins the ball, his two teammates join to attack and
counter in a 3v3. After the white team attack is over, the stripes attack 3v1.
Coaching points
- Movement
- Support
- Attacking moves (1-2, overlap, etc.)
- Dribbling and running with the ball (engage the defender before releasing)



22 – Counter-Punch
3v2 attack with a counter-attacking outlet.
If the two defenders win the ball, they will have an option to play a forward
pass and then make a quick forward run. The receiving player lays the ball
off for a one-touch finish.
How does this affect the way the white team attack 3v2? Do they need to be
conscious of keeping a player in a defensive position even while attacking?
The target player needs to move to find the most effective space.



23 – Recovery Runs
3v1 attack. Once the attackers cross the halfway line, the two players are
triggered to recover.
Can the one player delay the attack long enough for the two recovering
defenders to get into position to help?
Progression – change the trigger. Use a time limit or make the trigger the first
pass from the white team.
Coaching points
- The positioning of the defenders to delay
- The distance of the defenders from attackers
- Angles of recovering players’ runs



24 – Forward Passes, Forward Movement
2v2 play centrally. The aim is for the central two to play through the gate to
their teammate to score a point.
Progression – Allow the target player to drop into the central area and create
a 3v2 attack which allows a player to dribble through the gate to score a
point.
Coaching point
- Movement
- Angles
- Quick combinations
- Killer passes



25 – Press
The ball starts with a white player on the edge of the pitch. Before he passes,
one of the stripes must be in their own half. Once the pass is played, the
stripe steps up.
Can the stripes apply enough pressure to prevent the white team from getting
out of their half?
Can the white team play out and score?
Coaching points
- Coordination between the pressing players
- Setting traps and making play predictable
- Distances between pressing players
- Making ground quickly



26 – Press and Cover
Two players press high with the remaining stripe sweeping behind.
Can the two players direct the play in such a way that they can win the ball?
Can the one covering player look for opportunities to intercept passes or pick
up loose balls?
Coaching points
- The timing of when to press
- Target who to press
- Look for press triggers (poor touch, lofted pass, negative pass, engagement
with the touchline)



27 – Bounce Passers
2v2 with two neutral players wide. The neutral players can play one- or two-
touch. Neutral players can move anywhere along their line.
If the wide players are not being used, add a rule where a goal cannot be
scored unless one of the neutral players has touched the ball within the
attacking move. A further rule would be that both neutral players have to
touch the ball before a goal can be scored.
Coaching points
- Combinations
- Overloads
- Switching
- Underlaps
- Third man runs



28 – Wide Rotation
2v2 in the middle. Both teams have a player in a wide position.
If they pass to their wide player, the player who passed takes up the wide
position, and the receiving player comes onto the pitch from the wide
position.
Progressions
- The wide player must touch the ball before a goal can be scored.
- The player who passes the ball wide can rotate onto either end line or the
opposite wide position, not just the position of the player he passed to.



29 – Splitting Passes
Whites versus stripes. The striped team are locked into the middle section
until the moment they win possession.
Can the two white players pass the ball on the floor through the striped
players so that their teammate can score? (If they struggle to play through,
allow lifted passes).
If the stripes win the ball, they counter-attack and score.
Progressions
- Movement from the whites to disrupt the stripes (dropping into the central
zone to allow a 1-2).
- The white team may break the striped line with a dribble.
Coaching points
- Positioning of stripes
- Distances between stripes
30 – Killer Moment




3v3 in a tight midfield area.
Can the team in possession play into the end zone and score?
They can get through with a dribble, or pass into an on-running teammate.
Progression
- Allow one player to drop deep into their own zone to create a passing
option in a pocket of space behind the play.
Coaching points
- Combinations
- Angles
- Rotations



31 – First to Four
First team to score in all four goals wins. Once a goal has been scored, you
do not need to score in it again.
Coaching points
- Awareness
- Movement
- Support
- Imagination
- Creativity
- Transition



32 – Magic Square
The ball needs to pass through the magic square before the team in
possession score. No player should stay in the square.
This could be
- A player dribbling through the square
- A player receiving in the square
- A pass bisecting the square



33 – Defend The Middle
The striped team try to play through the square to score a point.
The white team look to stop the ball going through, and force an interception.
If the white team wins the ball, they break away to score in either goal.
Coaching points
- Distances
- Communication
- Discipline
- Concentration
- Adjustment to defend as the angles change



34 – Through The Gates 3v3
Whites vs stripes. Both teams score a point every time they play through a
gate. Play through with either a pass or a dribble.
Coaching points
- Positioning
- Possession
- Angles
- Movement



35 – Quick Transitions
1v0 attack from the white player.
Immediate 2v1 attack from the stripes.
Immediate 3v2 attack from the whites.
Follow with a 1v0 from stripes to start a new sequence.
Alternative sequence. 1v0. 1v1. 2v1. 2v2. 3v2. 3v3.
                      5: Breaking The Rules
Three versus three is the foundation of our practice, but it is born out of the
desire to create dribblers with game understanding. Ultimately, our choice of
practice is not driven by our favourite numbers but by principles.
As coaches, we do not always know how many players will turn up. We do
not know if our goalkeeping coach is available and whether goalkeepers will
be added into any session. We need to be flexible, therefore, and have plans
to fall back on. If our goalkeepers are working with the outfield players, the
simplest way to include them is to add them to our 3v3, allowing a smooth
transition from 3v3 work and then onto a game with increased numbers. The
practice will largely be the same for the outfield players, just with the
triangles being made in slightly higher positions and the possibility of a
fourth point being added, forming a diamond.
We can take similar steps with additional outfield players. If a seventh player
arrives to disrupt our perfect 3v3, that player can be added in to make a joker
or magic man without changing the objectives too greatly. It may even help a
practice that is geared towards overloads when in possession.
Although this book focuses on 3v3 and six player practices, it is important to
recognise that it is not the only way to work. To only work on 3v3 throughout
a player’s development would deny them the opportunity to practice
additional aspects of football.
The reasoning behind 3v3 is to maximise touches and utilise the core shape
in football – the triangle. Adding a player creates a diamond or square. Once
you move on from these shapes, offshoots appear which create further
triangles or diamonds but, more importantly, fresh options further away from
the ball. The sacrifice will be technical (to increase the tactical) but
provided we adhere to these shapes, larger numbers will tie into a 3v3
philosophy.
Sometimes it is good just to change up practices. Sometimes we have to
break our own rules in order to maintain our principles.
1 – 3v3 Waves + Goalkeepers




Stripes have three attacks. Then whites have three attacks.
The GK serves to any stripe.
Stripes attack whites 3v1. Then attack 3v2, then 3v3. If the white team wins
the ball, they attack the stripes (1v3, 2v3, 3v3).
After the three attacks, switch the team that starts the attack.
Coaching points
- What combinations and movements are possible?
- Attacks need to be at speed.
- How many touches are needed?
- Can players switch positions to make defending more difficult?
2 – Forward Runs




The goalkeeper serves to the side of his goal with two players. The receiving
player feeds into the target player on the halfway line. The two players
without the ball make forward runs beyond the target player. The solo player
moves to receive a pass that has been set back to him by the target player. He
can then play forward to either of the runners. Start with attacks alternating
from either end. Then progress to both ends starting their attacks at the same
time. Use the halfway line as an offside line for the forward runners. Can
they curve their runs to stay onside?
Progression
- The passing player does not join the attack and hangs back to act as a
defender against a 3v1 attack.
Coaching points
- Make sure to set the ball, and ensure forward passes are angled.
- Paint pictures for different types of finish based on position, angle,
goalkeeper position, and where a teammate is.
- Can you take out the goalkeeper so that a teammate can finish easily?



3 – Overloaded Attacks




Set up 2v1 for the attackers’ advantage in each half.
The goalkeeper feeds the ball to the defender or straight into an attacker to
start the attack. If the defender wins the ball, they launch a counter attack.
Attacks start at alternate ends.
Switch round to 2v1 in favour of the defenders. Defenders can join to create
2v2 or 3v2 (but they will be exposed at the back).
Coaching points
- Fast combination play.
- One-twos, overlaps, underlaps, forward passes, set and spin.
4 – Overloaded Attacks 2




Two against one in favour of the defenders. However, there are wide players
who are available. Defenders can join the attacks. The wide players must
move up and down to support the attacks.
The wide players are able to score. The wide positions should not be so
wide that they can’t realistically shoot. The forwards need to find positions
from which they can score.
A touch limit for the wide players may be needed to keep things flowing.
Coaching points
- Use the overload.
- Look for quick combinations.
- What are the best scoring positions?
- How can we best serve the forward(s)?
- Prioritise one-touch finishes.



5 – Spatial Awareness




Three against three plus two neutral players. Neutral players can go
anywhere on the pitch and can score. After a goal is scored, or an attack
ends, get a ball from either side. If you score, get another ball and attack
again; the team that was defending (stripes) gets any ball from the side to
attack.
Ensure that each team has a turn as the neutral players.
Progression
- Make play non-directional, so attackers are able to score in either goal. In
this case, if the goalkeeper gets the ball, they play to the team who did not
take the shot. The team cannot attack that goalkeeper until they have crossed
the halfway line and turned back.
Coaching points
- Combinations.
- Finishing.
- Movement.
- Forward runs.
- Spatial recognition.



6 – One vs One in the Middle




The middle player can only receive a pass from their own teammate. The
middle player can finish in any goal. If they score, they receive another ball
from their teammate. If they do not score, the player who was defending
receives a ball and attacks, or can score with the ball that is live should that
ball not go out of play after a shot, tackle, block or intercepted pass.
Progressions
- Use the lines as a shooting line to encourage shots from further out.
- Use the lines as an area from which to finish inside with one touch.
- Outside players serve with a lofted or clipped delivery.
- Make the game directional so players can only attack one end.
Coaching points
- First touch to set up a shot.
- Recognise picture for finish.
- Movement off the ball to find space.



7 – Link with Wide Players




The goalkeeper plays to a central player. The central player can play 1v1
against their opponent or pass to either of their teammates in the wide
positions. Look for the corner players to make checked runs from the corner
box into the box by the halfway line.
After the corner player receives the ball, they can cut in to attack or drive
down the line. The opposite side’s forward stays in their box to retain width.
They can move in to receive a far post finish.
Attack from alternate ends.
Coaching points
- Decision making – play forward quickly? Take on the opponent? Shoot?
Cross? Cut in?
- Checked movement to receive.
- Could the central player move to play up against the defender?
- Look to score as quickly as possible.



8 – Back to back + 3




Three whites vs three stripes plus three jokers.
The defending team cannot go inside the circle.
Play starts and restarts from the sides. The team that conceded starts with the
ball.
Progressions
- Remove the circle.
- Switch two of the three jokers for goalkeepers (or just add two
goalkeepers).
Coaching points
- Movement
- Awareness of space
- Combinations
- Finishing
- Imagination
- Creativity
                             6: Pitch Types
The great advantage of 3v3 is the number of actions that take place within a
small space. The disadvantage is that the 3v3 is only played in a small space.
Eventually players need to be able to work the ball out from the small space
and into a full-sized pitch’s wide open spaces. While football has become
even more technically-dependent, and the very best players are those who
can dominate their small spaces, teams have to be able to recognise the
spaces that the opposition leaves. With the trend towards teams pushing up
high, players must be able to use the space behind the opposition – with a
line pass or a diagonal pass – that exploits the weak side. In other words,
draw the opposition in close with short passes before playing out to the
spaces they have left behind. If teams are playing in low blocks then players
have to be able to use the width to overload teams, put crosses into the far
post, or play the ball in low and early. Or they need to be exceptional
individuals capable of isolating and eliminating opponents.
Defensively, players have to be able to deal with long passes. If they cannot
handle a ball travelling a long distance then teams will score a lot of very
easy goals. However, technically-capable players are, if they want to be
successful defenders – being able to deal with aerial balls will always be as
important as being able to defend one on one.
Three versus three is fantastic for technical and tactical development but
players will need to develop the more physical aspects of football. For this
reason, we must use larger formats of play as well. Variety is important to
player development so that they do not get stuck within a particular box. How
the players’ sessions are divided, and what weight is given to each, will
dictate the attributes the players prioritise.
If this book were to be translated into a session structure it might look like
this
1. Square based warm up
2. 1v1
3. 3v3 based practice
4. 6v6 (or larger numbers)
This is not hard and fast but more sessions would set up in this manner than
any other style. When the session moves into the larger practices, we can still
influence the way the game is played in accordance with our playing
principles, and relate things back to what has been worked on in the previous
segments. By choosing certain pitch ‘types’ (which we cover below), the
game will play out in a particular way, without any coaching. The
environment to continue practicing, yet having the freedom to create, can be
dictated by appropriate pitch types. On a regulation pitch, it is likely that to
achieve topic outcomes a coach will rely on heavy levels of intervention.
This may work but players, in general, prefer a practice to flow. Individual
interventions can keep the practice flowing but regular group interventions
may result in an unhappy set of players, especially young players. The lines
and shapes of the pitch create constraints for the practice; when these are
linked with the topic, the outcome can occur more naturally without regular
intervention. This means that when the coach does intervene, it carries
greater value.
A clear use of lines to mark areas is in the creation of zones (and the once
infamous zone 14; the area in which it was common for a number ten to
operate).
Pep Guardiola famously marks out his pitch into zones. Although these may
not actually be physically drawn upon the pitch, the players are aware of
them.
A basic version is simply a line through the centre of the pitch, running until
the final third. Another line then runs across the top forming a T shape. The
rules for this marking are that a left-sided player stays to the left of the centre
line, and a right-sided player stays to the right of the centre line. This is until
play enters the final third where players are free to move anywhere.
Guardiola’s most famous version divides the pitch into multiple areas. His
grid is comprised of 20 areas compared to the 17 more traditional zones.
These zoned pitches are great examples of how a layout can be used to help
players learn, and how the varying degrees of complexity can be an
indication of the stages of learning of both the coach and the players.



1 – Regulation Football Pitch




The pitch layout is simply that of the game in its most basic form. This
simplicity makes the layout suitable for various conditions, such as one and
two touch play, or finishing with one touch.
Coaches can also bring out any topic and outcome related to the game.
However, the downside of this is lessening of freedom of decision-making
for the players as their decisions are heavily coach-led.
Use for
- Anything
2 – Offset Goals




By placing the goals towards the corners of the pitch, the angles of the game
and spaces to defend and attack are altered. When teams are defending the
goal, they are likely to leave space in wide positions, which will create
opportunities to cross or cut inside to shoot.
Use for
- Crosses
- Overlaps
- Cutting inside
- Defending crosses



3 – Four-Goal Game
The four-goal game creates an environment where the players need to be
spatially aware. This pitch works particularly well for groups where they
don’t use the width of the pitch or are clustered towards the centre. The lure
of goals in wide positions encourages players to stay in wide areas away
from the ball.
Use for
- Switching play
- Space recognition
- Movement



4 – Six-Goal Game
The six-goal game is an extension of the four-goal game. Increasing the
number of goals on the pitch clearly increases the opportunities to score,
making for a more exciting game with more options to create chances. The
consequence of this is more finishing practice. It is also possible to involve a
goalkeeper and set them the difficult – but not impossible – task of defending
all three goals on their side of the pitch.
Use for
- Excitement
- Finishing
- Creativity



5 – Goals on All Sides
By placing goals around the pitch, the game is opened up through 360
degrees. Defending becomes very difficult but the array of attacking
possibilities is increased. Using the same set up, we can have a number of
situations:
- One team defending the two side goals (left and right), while the other
defends the two end goals (top and bottom).
- One team defends the left-hand goal and the bottom goal, while the other
defends the right-hand goal and the top goal.
- Both teams aim to score in every goal; the first team to score in every goal
is the winner.
Use for
- Spatial awareness
- Goal scoring
- Creativity
- Movement



6 – Back to Back Goals




This setup gives players something different to think about. Players are able
to occupy any area of the pitch, which encourages intelligent movement to
find space. This, in turn, encourages players to look for intelligent and
inventive passes. If goalscoring is too easy, an area around the goals can be
added that players are not allowed to enter. Goalkeepers often enjoy this
practice as they are kept busy.
Use for
- Spatial awareness
- Goal scoring
- Creativity
- Movement
- Positioning



7 – End Zones




Using end zones encourages players to make forward runs with, and without,
the ball. This also encourages passes that split defences.
The same setup can be used to position target players (one or two at each
end) to create a possession-based practice.
Use for
- End zone
- Forward runs
- Dribbling
- Breaking lines
- Combinations
8 – Reversed Goals with End Zones




By reversing the goals, teams have to play into the areas before scoring.
Teams can leave a player in the end zone to create a target. This player needs
to have good movement to help create better passing options. The game
combines elements of different setups which enable a variety of attacking
combinations.
Use for
- Forward movement
- Man marking
- Overlaps
- Passing down the sides
9 – Horizontal Thirds




Dividing the pitch into three areas replicates the basic thirds of the pitch.
This setup encourages buildup play using short passes. The game can end
with a shot at goal (to be added in), or a point being scored when the end line
is crossed.
If players are locked into their areas, it can make playing into the next zone
difficult; but this can be a good tool for learning positioning. If players are
locked in, but able to move into the next zone after passing forward, attacking
movements come into play. Finally, allowing players to dribble into the next
zone encourages the breaking of lines by dribbling.
Use for
- Through the thirds
- Playing out from the back
- Breaking lines
- Midfield build up
- Attacking overloads



10 – Magic Box




Using the box in the middle of the pitch encourages teams to penetrate the
centre of the pitch. Players can move in and out of the box to create rotating
movement in the middle of the pitch.
Defensively, teams can learn to defend the centre of the pitch and screen in
front of the defence, preventing passes into areas that will hurt the team.
Use for
- Through the thirds
- Playing out from the back
- Breaking lines
- Midfield build up
- Overlaps
- Diagonal passes



11 – Vertical Thirds




Similar to the horizontal thirds, but the focus here is on facing off with direct
opponents, whilst maintaining width and shape. If we play with two players
in each area, different types of combination play are applicable. Overlaps
and underlaps from the wide positions. One-twos, set and spins, and
crossover runs in the centre. Switching play and playing out principles also
become applicable.
Use for
- Overlaps
- Width
- Rotation
- Crosses
- Switching play
- Defensive cover



12 – Corners




Players in corners can act as target players to play into before scoring goals.
This will create crossing opportunities.
The corners can be left empty and players make runs into the corners,
enabling work on combinations.
Conversely, the corners can be used as safe zones for defenders to receive
the ball from the goalkeeper. This is pertinent to playing out from the back.
Use for
- Overlaps
- Crosses
- Targets
- Forward runs
- Playing out to full backs



13 – Central Area




The two lines across the centre of the pitch create areas for midfielders to
receive. Having two areas allows the players to pick up positions off each
other. Having the rule that they cannot be in the same line, at the same time,
encourages them to be offset and create angles.
The more advanced player of the two can receive and drive forward or move
from the zone to join attacks. This will improve the understanding of one
midfielder joining the attack and the other staying back to protect the defence.
Should a team regularly play with three central midfielders, the area could
have three lanes to replicate the positional play of three midfielders.
Use for
- Midfielders playing into forwards
- Turning
- Combinations
- Rotations



14 – Diamond Pitch




This pitch can be used in the same way as the pitch with corners, but can also
be used for shooting and attack practices.
As the pitch tapers centrally, we can work on combination play in the centre
of the pitch and players cutting in from wide positions to shoot. Adding a half
way line can encourage shots from closer or longer range as desired.
The practice can also be used for central defenders as they will need to stay
close to each other, developing their understanding of distances and their
partnership.
Use for
- Cutting in
- Defenders and goalkeeper narrowing
- Angles
- Positioning
- Underlaps
- Combinations
- Forward runs



15 – Quartered Pitch
This pitch creates areas for players to occupy, in a similar manner to the
pitches in thirds.
Depending on the numbers involved in the game, this practice will focus on
1v1 battles, overloads, or movement, in the quest to create and use
overloads.
From a defensive perspective, this setup can enable players to develop an
understanding of having a strong side and a weak side depending on the
position of the ball (if the ball is on the left side, you want that to be your
strong side; the right can be left exposed as the weak side because the ball is
not there).
Use for
- Positioning/positional play
- Defending
- Support
- Combinations
- Movement
- Spacing



16 – Horizontal Quarters with Four Goals




If players are locked into zones, we have 1v1 practices to work on.
Should the game involve four defenders with four zones and goals, the team
that is defending has to be aware of a strong side, a weak side, and who puts
pressure on the ball (and where). This is heightened even further if playing
3v3.
Offensively, four goals create lots of opportunities to score which will
increase the creative moments available to players.
Use for
- Back four
- Screening
- Cover
- Attacking play
- Switching
- Creativity



17 – Circular Pitch




Using a circle creates a pitch that has spaces behind the goals. The lack of
any corners will change the way that players use space and the way that they
find it.
Use for
- Spatial awareness
- Movement
- Imagination
- Variations on other pitch types in 360 degrees.



18 – Wide Channels




This pitch encourages wide play. The channels are usually safe zones
containing support players. These players work their way up and down the
line, helping the goalkeeper and defence to play out, making themselves
available for passes that switch the play, and delivering crosses.
If the wide players are specific to teams, we can enable them to dribble on to
the pitch when passed to. If the player who passes to them takes their place,
we develop rotation in wide areas.
Use for
- Wide play
- Rotation
- Crossing
- Switching play


Concluding comment
It should be noted that these are not the only possible uses for these pitches;
each pitch type can be adjusted by changing the type or number of goals used,
or pitch shape. For example, pitch 18 could be combined with pitch 3 to
change the focus of a practice.
                   7: A Practical Conclusion
Individual pieces eventually need to be pieced together. Once an element is
fully formed, it melds together with others to create a whole. A team. Or a
coaching session.
The simplest way to construct a session is by being linear. Increasing the
levels of opposition and complexity until arriving at the most complex
scenario of all: the match.
Warm Up Square
The players pass the ball across the square before moving to touch the cone.
The players practise technique and timing.




1v1
The players practise changing direction and accelerating away from the
defender.
3v3
The players practise combining and beating their direct opponents.
End zone game
In the end zone game, players score a point by either dribbling into the end
zone or passing to a teammate arriving in the end zone.




                                      Or
Warm Up Game
The receiving player attempts to dribble past the player who passed them the
ball.
1v1
The receiving player protects the ball from the defender behind him before
pushing away to the left or right and knocking the ball off the cone.
3v3 + Goalkeepers
Two vs one in each half. Players look to combine quickly to score. The play
starts with the goalkeeper each time.




Match
Straight game. Can the players use the elements from the previous practices
to attack and score?
The choice of parts to train will depend upon your knowledge of your
players and what they need, but the pattern does not always have to be this
way. The gradual increase is logical but could become repetitive if adhered
to for session upon session upon session.
The whole-part-whole session structure has risen in popularity in recent
years. One of the reasons for this is that it provides what kids really want
straightaway: a game.
Whole
Begin with a match.
Part 1
Warm Up Square
Players practice passing and movement patterns.
Part 2
1v1
Two players in the play 1v1 in the middle, using the outside players to help
retain possession.




Part 3
3v3
The play is 2v2 in the middle. The white team uses the end players to retain
possession. If the striped players win the ball, they score in either of the end
goals.
Whole
Magic square
The ball has to travel through the central square before the team can score by
crossing the end line (goals can also be used).
Time depending, we might choose to skip past one or two of the parts. Our
choice of which part to use (or which part to leave out) can be dictated by
many factors. The age and level of the players; older players who may not
need the pattern within part 1; younger players needing the pattern more than
they need either part 2 or part 3, depending on their level.
The previous session might also help determine what is left out. If, in the
previous session, patterns were worked on, then that might not be needed this
session. Alternatively, the session might have been an opposed directional
passing practice that the players struggled with, so the focus could be on the
passing pattern and trying to incorporate that into a game situation.
Circuit-based structures can also be effective for tuning players into a
session. If we believe the concentration and focus of our players begin to
wane after relatively short periods, then we can move along at a pace that fits
with them. There is an element of risk with this because a balance needs to
be struck between concentration time and the time needed to grasp the
practice. If players do not grasp the practice, they may not come out of it with
the understanding they need. However, expecting players to master a topic
within one session is unrealistic, so viewing each session as a part of a
whole, or a set of linked practices, means players have the time they need to
digest an idea.
This circuit might then be followed by a larger-sided game that encourages
dribbling and combination play.
Another possibility is to make such a set up competitive. With two teams of
players spread across the areas. The players decide who plays in each area
and the scores are added together. If multiple rounds are played, it should be
possible to ensure players take part in each different game.
By being able to use circuit-based setups, we can cope with larger numbers
of players at sessions and adapt, while still making the session engaging and
exciting. Often, when coaches suddenly find themselves with far greater
numbers than expected – targeted outcomes or topics are cast aside. By
theming the areas, all players remain involved and specific areas of the game
can still be the focus. In the above example, the overall theme in mind would
be exploiting space on the weak side. The 1v1 practices look at dribbling
towards the corners, the squares explore types of pass, and the four-goal
game typically encourages players to stay wide.
A different choice could be to work on specific positions or with certain
units. Without breaking into nuances, a team is split into three outfield units:
defence, midfield, and attack. We can create a layout using 3v3 practices to
work on these units.
Area 1 focuses on 1v1 defending by locking players into their channels. The
defenders have to make the choice whether to stay tight and defend man-to-
man or be aware of the position of their opponent but stay away, defending
their space as a priority. The set up also allows the defender closest to the
ball to apply pressure and the two defenders away from the ball to take their
positions accordingly. When the players are unlocked from their zones, there
are additional aspects of the defence shifting across and the complication of
tracking runners. (This practice might be used with a different focus at
another time, looking at the combination play of the attacks.)
Area 2 focuses on both attacking and defending for central midfielders. Can
the white team combine to play forward? Can the striped team stay compact
and prevent a forward pass? If the stripes win the ball, they break out to
score. The progression is for one stripe to come out and press, allowing two
players to sweep up behind. A further progression is for two players to press
and one to sweep behind. The time spent on each progression can depend on
the system your team uses in midfield.
Area 3 has links to area 2 with teams attempting to play forward. The team in
possession send a player into the end zone. They are a target man to play
passes into. The goals are reversed so the forward needs to work on
movement from side to side to create passing lanes. The forwards can be
fixed inside the area. Another progression could be that the forward is not
allowed to score but has to set the ball for a running teammate to finish. If the
goalkeepers are working separately, they can eventually be joined into the
practice. If they are not be being coached separately, they can be included
from the beginning.
Setting up three areas in a row may also be useful in different environments
where the monitoring of participants is important. Once again, this comes
down to knowing the players and knowing who can be left to work
independently and who needs extra attention to stay on task. Setting up
multiple areas in a row allows the coach to patrol the space.




Setting the area up as square can also enable the coach to monitor all areas
without moving. However, with some groups, this may not work as the coach
will always have their back to someone.
Coaching conundrums will always be around: time, outcomes, freedom,
engagement and control.
- How can I best use the time?
- How can I get the outcomes for the players?
- How can I ensure the players have enough freedom to express themselves
but stay on task?
- How can I ensure control of the group?
By using different setups, and well-designed practices, we can enhance our
chances of successfully answering these questions.
A large part of the job of a coach is creating a positive environment. What
does that actually mean, though? Players need to feel safe, not just physically
safe but mentally and emotionally safe. Especially with young players. Safe
to ask questions without being judged. Safe to be free. The knowledge that
they are able to express for themselves is very powerful. The safety to make
mistakes without being judged is vital to their development. ‘Being judged’
is the key phrase; mistakes will happen, mistakes will need to be
acknowledged to help with improvement, but a mistake is not fatal and not
something that will lead to a barracking. If we are to help players to reach
heights of creativity, imagination, and invention, they must be allowed to fail.
If they aren’t failing, they aren’t experimenting. In order for them to do so,
they must feel safe.
Creativity is usually thrilling and exciting. Practices that encourage these
things tend to be enjoyable. There has been a tendency to ensure that players
have had a fun session. What do we mean by fun? Or enjoyable? What we
really need is for a session or practice to be exciting. Exciting practices,
overall, involve competition. A scoring system of some sort, or actual
scoring. Goals make young players come alive; they make their hearts’ sing.
When they are practicing and playing, we need to ensure they have plenty of
chances to sing. For them to be excited. Goals also have the added effect of
making the practice directional, which adds extra realism. Good defending
can be rewarded with goalscoring opportunities, and the encouragement of
good defending. Launching an explosive counter-attack is far more exciting
than kicking the ball out of play.
Therein lies the foundations of playing football. If, as a team or individual,
we do not have the ball, it is highly likely that – at some stage – we will need
to get it back. How we decide to get it back is a tactical choice that can be
made on an individual, unit, or team basis. Once we have the ball, we then
need to decide what to do with it. Do we attack at pace? Or do we retain
possession of the ball? The match situation or even competition situation will
dictate this. All of the elements of the game need to be experienced in order
for players to reach their potential. Playing in triangles, recovering into
position, switching play, dominating 1v1 situations – all of these technical
and tactical elements will exist within the 3v3 setup. Players will have the
opportunity to repeat the situations without repeating the practices. Players
will learn match situations, while still being granted the safety to play with
freedom.
Give the players excitement, and they will want more. The more they want,
the more they will fall in love with football, playing for as long as they can
and at as high a level as possible.
I hope that these practices can help them achieve that.
Other Books from Bennion Kearny
www.BennionKearny.com/soccer
