NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

U E FA A L I C E N C E
THE ROLE OF THE WINGER - FROM THE
NUMBERS TO THE TRAIN ING GROUND

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA
O S L O, 2 0 1 4 - 2 0 1 5

Summary
There is a different level of reflection that arises from the study of the numbers. As the football game
structure becomes clearer and more defined in a theoretical point of view (will we ever understand
its complexity?), the quest for the algorithms that could give us a better control over the outcome
becomes more intense. The Norwegian Centre of Football Excellence has been working in the report
Kompetansekrav i Rolle. Such report has been providing the clubs and coaches’ with an insight on top
team and top players performances in the most high rated football competitions (Champions League,
World Cup and European Championship). A large amount of match videos have been analyzed,
discussed and dissected into the most pragmatic information possible. In Kompetansekrav i Rolle a
vast and multi-faceted set of resources and references are integrated in an overview of each player
position on the pitch, their role definition and specific competence. We decided to have the winger
as the object of our study and analysis. The wingers are a cultural trait in Portuguese football. There
are some characteristics in the role of the winger that provide that immediate rush of emotion when
they are in the center of the game, reason why the role of the winger is one of the most exciting
objects of study that we can choose in the modern football context. To add up, the playing style from
Rosenborg has been established particularly during the ninety’s when the club knew his best period
in national and international competitions. The system of play hasn’t met any considerable changes
since then. At the moment, the club has adopted a bak til røttene trend and this has repercussions at
all the levels in the club. Naturally, it goes through the development of players in the youth system
as well as player recruitment. Our expectation was that this report could have a contribution to
strengthen the concepts and the practices designed for the development and recruitment of the
young players that not only perform the role of the winger, but as to many other positions and roles.
There is a time and place for different learning styles. Many factors such as the players’ level of
expertise, their training age, playing level will affect the approach taken. Still, the methods used in
every coaching course and coaching sessions rely deeply in the explicit learning style and at first, this
appears the logical approach as it provides a methodical approach to teaching and subsequently
checking for understanding or learning by the player. Giving rules to follow prior to and during
practices or games and questioning afterwards are explicit methods that we regularly have
acknowledged. There are an increasing number of coaching methods being developed to use implicit
learning techniques such as Constraints Based Coaching and Teaching Games for Understanding, but
coaches need to understand the reasoning behind these methods. We include the theme of implicit
learning and non-linear pedagogy to attempt to present a way to approach training apart from the
“conventional way”.
This report is divided in five chapters. To better define the limits of this study it was important to
approach the concepts that were going to be discussed. Therefore, at first we have worked on the
concepts of implicit and explicit learning, non-linear pedagogy, as well as which elements should we
consider when we are designing and planning games or exercises in football. Secondly we have
focused on our problem definition and research questions. Two objectives were defined for this
report: a) to translate the information provided by NCFE to a pragmatic training approach on the
pitch; b) through the processing of the previous point, create and organize conditioned games that
could enhance incidental (implicit) learning in the wingers. We have focused on the information that
has been collected and analyzed by TFS in reference to the project Kompetansekrav i rolle, and we
dissected it and created a matrix of conditioned games to achieve the reference attributes for the
winger. To conclude this report we discussed its end product and reviewed the limitations of this
study. We concluded with the evaluation of the whole process of its writing and we have drawn our
expectations on the impact of this study for the coaches’ practice.

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Table of Contents
I.

Introduction.................................................................................................................................................... 4
A)

Why should we look for (and to) the numbers in football? ....................................................................... 5

B)

The Winger ................................................................................................................................................. 6

C)

Data collection and the Norwegian Centre of Football Excellence ............................................................ 6

D)

Implicit learning and non-linear pedagogy ................................................................................................ 7

E)

The objectives and the structure of the report ......................................................................................... 8

II.

Conceptual framework ................................................................................................................................... 9
A)

Implicit and explicit learning .................................................................................................................... 10

B)

Non-linear pedagogy and Teaching Games for Understanding ............................................................... 12

C)

The structure of exercises and games in football .................................................................................... 15

III.

Problem definition ................................................................................................................................... 18

IV.

Methodology ............................................................................................................................................ 19

V.

Data Analysis ................................................................................................................................................ 22
A)

Wingers’ goal assists ................................................................................................................................ 23
Phase 1 – Movement before the ball ........................................................................................................... 23
Phase 2 – From the opportunity to reality ................................................................................................... 25
Phase 3 – The decisive passing ..................................................................................................................... 26

B)

Wingers’ crossing situations .................................................................................................................... 28
Phase 1 – Movement before the ball ........................................................................................................... 28
Phase 2 – From the opportunity to reality ................................................................................................... 30
Phase 3 – The decisive passing ..................................................................................................................... 31

C)

Wingers’ scoring sequence ...................................................................................................................... 33
Phase 1 – Finding the scoring space ............................................................................................................. 33
Phase 2 – Conquering the scoring space ...................................................................................................... 35
Phase 3 – Finishing ....................................................................................................................................... 36

VI.

Discussion ................................................................................................................................................ 38
A)

Matching the report objective(s) ............................................................................................................. 38

B)

Difficulties, challenges and limitations .................................................................................................... 41

VII.

Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................ 42

A)

The report End Product ............................................................................................................................ 42

B)

Personal reflection ................................................................................................................................... 43

VIII.

References ............................................................................................................................................... 44

Endnotes ............................................................................................................................................................... 46

3

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

I.

2014-2015

Introduction

Football is a cultural phenomenon. Is the only sport that we can actually call truly global1. Working
professionally in football has become more and more demanding in the last decades. But football is
not only a cultural phenomenon; it has become an industry with broader proportions. Football is a
business: transfers, sponsorships, TV rights, merchandising, stakeholders and owners. As this football
business environment gets more complex outside the pitch, inside the pitch - and particularly on the
training ground - the demands are higher. We are now dealing more and more with numbers. It is a
permeable process between the suits and tie and the tracksuit. As the data collection and analysis
around the teams’ and players’ performance become more detailed, the scrutiny is faster and more
judgmental. The numbers chemistry from the suit and tie side are shifting and are more and more
concentrated on the tracksuit side. And the head coaches are Maxwell’s demon2 in this process,
controlling the opening of the door that makes this shifting possible.
Football coaches are prisoners of numbers. Three points, one point, zero points. Three goals, two
goals, zero goals. The numbers for points on the championship table are the sum of many other
equations that lead to the sound of victory or the silence of defeat. The large numbers after ninety
minutes are the result of the inter-dynamic of many others that took place during every second of
the match and every second of the training, matches and seasons previous to that. And we are more
aware of that. Things are, therefore, more complex. Still, this complexity that the numbers express
involves so many variables that it becomes hard to cope with such delude of information.3 Naturally,
some of us chose to ignore the existence of such variables and become resistant to all type of new
information. The decision making remains intuitive and based on feelings of previous experience.
Research on the intuitive thinking has been showing us on the last decades that it is not as linear and
simple has once thought, and definitely not as complete as a decisional process has we tend – or
want – to believe4. Using arguments like my experience tells me, or we have always done it like this,
hidden in I am a kind of an intuitive coach, are just not enough anymore. It does not mean that we
should not rely on our intuition – we have to! –, but instead that we should be aware that: a)
deliberate thought is needed whenever there is time for that; b) using only our intuition (I feel like…)
always in our decision making can lead us to errors that we could avoid if the chosen mode of
thought was another. Intuition is not a shield to use against the fact that we do not need to study
anymore nor reflect deeply about the situations. It is a powerful mind tool to use at the right time in
the right place.
We believe that is important to close the gap between what science knows and what we do in
football5. Engaging in the task that we purpose here serves that belief. However, what we want to
discuss in this report is only a fraction of the immensity of scientific evidence provided by academic
or institutional research in football. It’s not our intention either to serve a dichotomy of right or
wrong, good or bad. In education and learning there are space and time for different approaches and
styles. The most important message from our report is to show that everything should be considered
and that better decisions – on an off the field – are drawn with more and better information,
independently from the source (conscious or nonconscious).
We will also be encouraged by new advancements in learning theory, supported by neurobiology,
neuroscience, educational sciences and psychology and challenge the conventional coaches practices
on the training ground. The product of our work will be shaped by matching the reference numbers
of the football elite level concerning the wingers and an approach to training through an implicit
perspective, taking into account the theoretical arguments of non-linear pedagogy.

4

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

A) Why should we look for (and to) the numbers in football?
There is a different level of reflection that arises from the study of the numbers. As the football game
structure becomes clearer and more defined in a theoretical point of view (will we ever understand
its complexity?), the quest for the algorithms that could give us a better control over the outcome
becomes more intense. There are conceptual mainframes on how to divide the game into its playing
moments (offensive organization, defensive organization, offensive transition, defensive transition,
set pieces6), phases of play and dynamic (critical points of change like time of play, scoring or
numerical advantage). Using and applying this knowledge, each coach, club or team, can create their
own principles of play (what to prioritize, when and how) and shape a playing style so that the
outcome could better serve their objectives. This playing style can then be operationalized in the
season planning of the training cycles, sessions and exercises, so that the players can experience
more frequently what is expected from them. The numbers analysis can feed and serve this process
in different moments. In the three last seasons of the UEFA Champions League (2011/2012,
2012/2013, 2013/2014) 38.9% of the goals were scored after a moment of offensive organization,
32.8% were scored after an offensive transition (counter-attack or fast break) and 25.7% were scored
after a set piece (corner or free kicks)7. If we are preparing our team to play in such competition in
the 2014/2015 season, what can we take from this information? Should we prioritize the offensive
organization or the offensive transition of our team? How to prepare the team to defend more
efficiently? How much should we focus on set pieces, both offensive and defensive? These are few of
the many possible questions that are coming from the data collection above. This type of information
is one drop in a vast ocean.
It’s important to refer as well that the numbers that we study need a clear definition of the context
that it serves. This means that the numbers that we use as reference should be applied in the
regularity of the situation from which they were extracted. It doesn’t seem logical to us that the
numbers that we get from a certain level or a specific competition are used as a reference for
different levels or competitions. When we decide to use the World Cup numbers we turn our level of
analyze, as well as possible inputs, back to the level where the numbers are coming from. If we want
to develop the winger for Tippeliga, then we need the reference numbers from such level of
competition.
Therefore, it is not the purpose of this report to dive into all the data collection or to analyze every
significant aspect of modern football. It would be a too long and to dense task and one that, at its
end point, would be already obsolete. Modern football is tomorrow. Still, the numbers are there. The
main question is what to see, why and for what end. The challenge that we purpose ourselves is to
how to translate all the information available into practical and pragmatic inputs in our tasks of
planning, delivery and evaluation of the training cycles, sessions or exercises. It is in this direction
that we chose to drive into. Even so, there are different pathways that are going to be defined as
long as we go further with our intentions. There are many possible ways to engage in this translation
from numbers to practice and we are choosing one of them. It’s probably “less conventional”
pathway.
Still, the process is the most important and that is the legacy that we hope to establish. It’s not about
what we are attempting to do, but how we are doing it. We also hope that further attempts to follow
our path can make the process better and more consistent. At the end of our report we hope to
extend further our expectations.

5

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

B) The Winger
António Simões, José Alberto Costa, António Oliveira, Fernando Chalana, Diamantino Miranda, Paulo
Futre, Luis Figo, Ricardo Quaresma, Simão Sabrosa, Nani, Cristiano Ronaldo. Half of these names are
strange to Norwegian ears, but they are so present in the memory of football fans in Portugal. They
were or are all wide players (mainly wingers). The wingers are part of our national football legacy.
They are natural one-on-oners’ with magical tricks and a starving desire of beating several players in
the same play. I’ve grown with some these names in my imagination. There are not that many
situations when the people in the stands leave the comfort of their seats for brief moments. When a
goal is scored or when the eminence of it is perceived (1 v GK) are two of those situations. It is
logical, as the goal is the ultimate explosion of emotions in a game (for both sides). Still, there is also
something happening when a winger gets the ball on his flank. Suddenly we can feel glimpses of
hope - and fear - in the stands. Almost as powerful as an imminent goal chance. The crowd knows
that the game can change in those next seconds. Magical things are about to happen. A flamboyant
dribble, a lightning change of speed or a clean-cut crossing can take the crowd to ecstasy. The story
of the wingers in Portuguese football begins long before Luis Figo or Cristiano Ronaldo. The wingers
are a cultural trait in Portuguese football. They are fast and flamboyant dribblers that passionate the
crowd. Watching a winger getting the ball in a football match it’s almost like love at first sight. You
love unconditionally from that moment, but you can quite explain why. There are some
characteristics in the role of the winger that provide that immediate rush of emotion when they are
in the center of the game, reason why the role of the winger is one of the most exciting objects of
study that we can choose in the modern football context.
Studying the winger has also a practical reason and an immediate output in my own coaching
professional development, as Rosenborg BK formation has high demands from the winger role. The
playing style from Rosenborg has been established particularly during the ninety’s when the club
knew his best period in national and international competitions. The system of play hasn’t met any
considerable changes since then. At the moment, the club has adopted a bak til røttene trend and
this has repercussions at all the levels in the club. Naturally, it goes through the development of
players in the youth system as well as player recruitment. Our expectation is that this report can
have a contribution to strengthen the concepts and the practices designed for the development and
recruitment of the young players that not only perform the role of the winger, but as to many other
positions and roles.
Yet, the wingers are a type of player that have something that it’s uncoachable. They all share a
glimpse of creativity and imagination that it’s easier to recognize that to teach. As coaches, we can
have an idea of what is important for a certain position on the pitch when it comes to the frequent
actions or specific attributes. We can also have a direct instruction or an if-then rule to better
exemplify what to expect from the player(s). But it’s more difficult to train and coach those seconds
when something unexpected happen and changes the game. The numbers might help us to clarify
what is important, but the ultimate creation comes from the player.

C) Data collection and the Norwegian Centre of Football Excellence
The Norwegian Centre of Football Excellence (or TFS Norsk Toppfotballsenter) has been working for
some time now in two main topics: Spillet som Referanse and Kompetansekrav i Rolle. Both reports
have been providing the clubs and coaches’ with an insight on top team and top players
performances in the most high rated football competitions (Champions League, World Cup and
European Championship). A large amount of match videos have been analyzed, discussed and
dissected into the most pragmatic information possible. In Kompetansekrav i Rolle a vast and multi-

6

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

faceted set of resources and references8 are integrated in an overview of each player position on the
pitch, their role definition and specific competence. We deal with very specific information about a
very specific topic that we want to convert in a very specific approach to the practice.
Some of the UEFA A written reports at the Norwegian Football Federation have been approaching
similar topics (Holme, 2014; Iversen, 2013; Rushfeldt, 2013; Riisnæs, 2010). However, our intention is
to go further on its repercussions in the training ground. More than having a must-do-list or a set of
prominent actions, we look for a direct input through the way that the games can be organized so
that we can maximize the players learning in this specific role. The main objective in this report is to
develop a mainframe that can guide the coaches on the training ground when they are aiming to
work on or develop a specific role. In particular when it comes to games and play. The process behind
this objective is the most important, but the consequence of this task has to be clear and pragmatic.
Only this way it can reach the coaching community. How to go from the reference numbers about
the wingers to the input on the training ground?

D) Implicit learning and non-linear pedagogy
There is a time and place for different learning styles. Many factors such as the players’ level of
expertise, their training age, playing level will affect the approach taken. Still, the methods used in
every coaching course and coaching sessions rely deeply in the explicit learning style and at first, this
appears the logical approach as it provides a methodical approach to teaching and subsequently
checking for understanding or learning by the player. Giving rules to follow prior to and during
practices or games and questioning afterwards are explicit methods that we regularly have
acknowledged. There are an increasing number of coaching methods being developed to use implicit
learning techniques such as Constraints Based Coaching and Teaching Games for Understanding, but
coaches need to understand the reasoning behind these methods. We include the theme of implicit
learning and non-linear pedagogy to attempt to present a way to approach training apart from the
“conventional way”. Both themes are studied in the conceptual framework part of this report and an
attempt to organize and create games for the wingers’ training and skill acquisition is the core of our
report.

7

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

E) The objectives and the structure of the report
When the previous subjects are studied and linked with the context of this report, two main
objectives are drawn:
a) To translate the information provided by NCFE to a pragmatic training approach on the pitch;
b) Through the processing of the previous point, create and organize conditioned games that
could enhance incidental (implicit) learning in the wingers.
The problem definition is defined according to our intentions above. We are capable to preview
before we start this report that the translation of the numbers will be possible, as it’s a regular
practice in professional and top level coaching environments. The challenge is that normally such
translation is applied to a specific playing style or game approach and in consequence to the players
involved in such dynamic. We want to do it for one specific role. The second challenge is to achieve
this translation in a pragmatic way. We will look for a matrix design that can capture the coaches
enthusiasm instead of pushing them way. The second objective is far more complicated to achieve.
Traditionally the coaches rely on their direct instruction to enhance the players’ behavior in a set of
game situations. Even in training game situations (7v7, 8v8, undertall or overtall), the coach directive
approach is seen as strictly necessary for the decision making of the players to be adjusted to what is
happening on the pitch. There is no reason for us to believe that in the case of a specific role
development it would happen otherwise (go here, do that, cross now). What we believe and is
reflected in our second objective is that the efficiency of the actions of the winger (according to the
NCFE numbers) can be accomplished with specific game constraints that will enhance the frequency
of the desired actions, in an implicit way, and therefore increase the chances of memory retention.
This report is divided in five chapters. To better define the limits of this study it’s important to
approach the concepts that are going to be discussed. Therefore, at first we will work on the
concepts of implicit and explicit learning, non-linear pedagogy, as well as which elements should we
consider when we are designing and planning games or exercises in football. Secondly we focus on
our problem definition and research questions. The following two parts are reserved for the
methodology presentation and data collection and discussion. We will describe how the research
method of the report is and how this process is organized. Then we will focus on the information that
has been collected and analyzed through video by TFS in reference to the project Kompetansekrav i
rolle, and we will dissect it and attempt to transfer it to practical inputs on the training ground. To
conclude this report we will review the limitations of this study as we evaluate the whole process of
its writing, we will draw our expectations on the impact of this study for the coaches’ practice and
finally, attempt to propose new questions and new angles of research to add more depth to the
theme.

8

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

II.

2014-2015

Conceptual framework

In research-oriented reports and projects is important to clarify the theoretical background which it
has reference to for two main reasons: a) to define the context in which the research is placed and
narrowing the angle of approach; b) to provide a conceptual platform to discuss the results and to
draw the conclusions. It’s in this framework that we will engage through this chapter. We have
selected three main subjects in which our conceptual framework will be based on: the discussion
around the dichotomy of implicit and explicit learning, the concepts and challenges of non-linear
pedagogy and the nature and structure of the exercises and games in football. It’s important to refer
that one of the goals goal of our approach is - as referred in the introduction concerning the numbers
and the football world – to close the gap between what science knows and what we do in football. It
is also our intention to provoke the alchemy between what science knows in the learning field of
study (more particularly in physical education and team and ball sports) and what we do in football.
We will make reference to what recent research in psychology, educational sciences and
neurobiology has been showing us recently and its repercussion on the training ground. We will use
this conceptual framework to somehow justify why we chose to have a transfer from the numbers to
the training ground based on conditioned games or games with constraints. For each theoretical
approach we will highlight the key aspects for further discussion.
Coaches need to understand how people learn, because coaching and teaching are only effective if they engage
learning. If you think that all you have to do is warm them up, tell them, show them and correct them, you
won’t be very effective. Learning is more complicated – and more interesting – than that.
Claxton and Allpress (2008)

Fig. 1 - Problem solving… (Football by Mordillo, 2012)

9

Fig. 2 – Dribbling skills … (Football by Mordillo, 2012)

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

A) Implicit and explicit learning
In the past ten years, the educational field has learned more about how the brain works than in the
previous ninety years. Largely due to the convergence of neuro-science, cognitive psychology and
technology, new information is possible, information that for many of us verifies the effectiveness
we’ve enjoyed with students and at the same time radically shifts our models of instruction
(Reardon, 1999). One of the areas of research that have received much attention from the field of
neuroscience is the study of emotion and memory as well as their relationship to the cognitive
processes of the human brain. This is an important area for us coaches to invest our study time into
not only because it can guide the way we relate and connect to our players, but also because - as
Connolly9 argues - the experts are the coaches not the data collectors, so information needs to be
relayed quickly and in a manner they can understand. Some of the revelations of research are that
emotions are indispensable for rationality, such that one cannot reason without emotions or feelings
(Damásio 1994). In addition, research on memory, particularly implicit memory, which deals with
nonconscious cognitive processing of past experience, reveals that a great deal of learning takes
place outside our working memory and has a tremendous influence on how we look and act in the
world (Greenwald & Banji, 1995; Schacter, 1996). Such statements are frequent in the field of
neurobiology and psychology which bring to light an explanation of the interdependent relationship
that exists between reason and emotions and how decision making can occur outside ones’
conscious awareness. Reason has been traditionally perceived as a high order function located in the
neocortical area of the brain (grey matter) operating as a single system, a process based on valid
rules of inference like rules of grammar (Johnson-Laird & Oatley, 1992). In contrast, emotions have
been viewed as low order functions, separate from reason, located in the subcortical structures (inner
layer), apart of the limbic system of the brain. When discussing cognitive processes, emotions are
often omitted, considered too elusive, despite their qualifying nature in the process of reason
(Damásio, 1994).
In adult learning, Taylor argued in his approach that transformative learning is purported to be highly
dependent upon the centrality of experience, rational discourse and critical reflection. However,
recent research reveals a process of transformation independent of critical reflection, whereby there
is a nonconscious development of thoughts and actions such that meaning structures may become
altered outside the participants’ focal awareness (Taylor, 1997). This learning that takes place
implicitly provides insight into transformative learning theory, revealing a process less dependent
upon the conscious act of reasoning and logic, and similar to understanding the role of feelings and
emotions. The author continues in categorizing three ways of implicit memory, naming procedural
knowledge has equal to skills and habits, inclusive of perceptual and cognitive abilities, which
research has shown can be learned and improved upon outside one focal awareness. Existing neural
evidence suggests that skills and habit learning are less dependent on declarative memory and don’t
involve the same brain structures. A second form of implicit memory is category-level knowledge,
which is the ability to classify information based in natural categories. A third form of implicit
memory is conditioning, learning a simple conditioned response, which is best understood in relation
to emotions such as fear, where people’s actions in dangerous situations are often based on nondeclarative thought (Taylor, 2001). The Annual Review of Psychology has noted that there has been a
swing from interest in deliberate strategies to interest in automatic, unconscious processes,
reflecting an appreciation that certain situations (e.g. recognition, frequency judgments, savings in
indirect task, aspects of skill acquisition, etc.) seem not to depend much on the products of strategic,
effortful or reflective processes.

10

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

(…) The truly ridiculous thing is that there are two proven learning styles that every coach should
be made aware of, yet hardly any coaching courses makes reference to it despite the fact that the
coaching methods they teach rely heavily on one of these methods in particular (Taylor, 2001).
From both authors contributions is important to retain two key ideas: the non-exclusive dependence
of learning from consciousness and the role of the emotions in reasoning processes. Such
information will be important to relate to the nature of the games that we will purpose for the
wingers training and skill acquisition. There are an increasing number of coaching methods being
developed to use implicit learning techniques such as Constraints Based Coaching and Teaching
Games for Understanding, but coaches need to understand the reasoning behind these methods.
There is no point creating a practice that aims for implicit learning and then use explicit cues during
the process. It can be a frustrating process for the coach as the explicit methods are so ingrained in
our sporting culture and it often takes athletes longer to acquire a skill this way. Once acquired
though, the skill is much more stable and resilient to pressure.
We tend to forget actions came before words in our evolutionary history that implicit motor
learning is the most natural way for humans to learn motor skills (Reber, 1993).
Coaches cannot play the game for the players and due to their personal differences the way they
perform a skill will vary. As a result coaches need to allow players to find their own way of solving
the puzzles of how to achieve the sporting outcome required of them. An example of implicit
learning would be an athlete performing hill sprints or jumping backwards prior to a sprint which will
naturally put them into an inclined body position suitable for accelerations rather than telling them
what to do. There is a time and place for everything and an implicit shouldn´t be the only approach.
Many factors such as the players’ level of expertise, their training age, playing level will affect the
approach taken. Still, the methods used in every coaching course and coaching sessions rely deeply in
the explicit learning style and at first, this appears the logical approach as it provides a methodical
approach to teaching and subsequently checking for understanding or learning by the athlete. Giving
rules to follow prior to and during practices or games and questioning afterwards are explicit
methods that we regularly have acknowledged. Approaching training (and coaches education) based
on an implicit learning perspective requires critical and creative thinking to shape the training
environment and structure the sessions and the exercises in order to produce the desired movement
or playing outcome. It also makes it hard for the coach to assess how much the athlete has learnt due
to the unclear lines between motor performance and motor learning as We do not directly observe
learning; we directly observe behavior (…) we must make inferences about learning from the behavior
we observe (Magill, 1993). Another issue that creates some resistance from coaches and coacheseducators in adopting a practice based on implicit learning is because the retroaction from our
actions (as coaches) is very slow and it compromises our perspective of how effective training
actually is. We don’t know how effective a different approach can be, so we keep having the same
practice routine.

11

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Fig. 3 – Long term memory pathways (http://blogs.ubc.ca/cognophilia/)

B) Non-linear pedagogy and Teaching Games for Understanding
Quantity and quality of practice are crucial to the development of expertise. Teachers and coaches
carefully consider the micro-structure of practical sessions to maximize learning opportunities.
Recent evidence suggests that children in physical education classes on average spend only 25% of
the time actually engaged in physical activity (Chow J. , Davids, Button, Renshaw, Shuttlework, &
Uehara, 2008). Dividing practice sessions into warm-ups, drills, games and cool downs can limit
learning opportunities even more, since only undertaking practice activities that are representative
of performance demands will lead to transfer of skills between practice and performance
environments. An established concept from ecological psychology, associated with a Nonlinear
Pedagogy, is that behaviors of individuals cannot be understood without reference to their specific
environments (Chow J. , Davids, Button, Renshaw, Shuttlework, & Uehara, 2008). Actions are
supported by perceptual information from the environment and, in turn, perception of high quality
information is acquired by acting. This assumption has implications for games teachers and highlights
the need to ensure congruence of practice environments with dynamic performance environments.
In Teaching Games for Understanding (TGfU), as in Nonlinear Pedagogy, there are no universal rights
or wrongs in terms of techniques used or decisions made. That is, there is no emphasis on learners’
acquisition of perceived “optimal movement patterns” for success in team games. The functionality
of a particular decision or action is determined by how well it satisfies the constraints of the game.
Providing performers with multiple opportunities to explore and work out problems for themselves
is in line with Bernstein’s10 definition of practice as repetition without repetition, a key feature in
Nonlinear Pedagogy. Creating variability in practice is essential to learners’ exploratory activities
during game play and produces flexible and adaptive individuals who can create new solutions to
solve typical motor problems. (Chow J.Y., 2008).
Although most discussions on the validity of TGfU have been focused on the development of game
awareness and tactical understanding, its authors did not neglect technical development in their

12

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

model. They specified that when students see the need for a particular kind of skill and are ready for
these skills within the context of a game, technical instruction is given (Werner, Thorpe & Bunker,
1996, cited by Chow J.Y., 2008).
As we stated before, high levels of explicit verbal instruction and directive feedback are the norm in
conventional coaching, since beginners in sport are believed to be reliant on conscious control
processes in movement. However, Bernstein’s insights on the control of action suggest that most
movement behaviors are typically regulated by subconscious processes. Explicit instructions force
learners to switch to higher levels of action control and that can lead to performance disruption. In
Nonlinear Pedagogy, verbal information is seen as a temporarily imposed informational constraint
provided by teachers that can have positive or negative effects on performance. Using explicit
instruction directed at conscious control processes in a skill remark might have a negative effect on
learning since it is unlikely to direct learners to the regulatory information flows available during
games performance. Conversely, more positive instructions might be those that do not specifically
prescribe a movement solution but guide exploration and use of implicit learning strategies to allow
intrinsic self-organization processes to be enhanced during learning. Forcing learners to attend to
inappropriate information sources should be avoided and good practice could constrain individuals
to search for the most useful information to underpin their actions and decisions. A useful strategy
could be to constrain learners to focus their attention externally on outcomes of movements rather
than on internal control processes (Chow J. , Davids, Button, Renshaw, Shuttlework, & Uehara, 2008).
The use of questioning to guide this search process has been considered an important strategy for
developing autonomous, intelligent performers who understand their own performance and can
comment verbally on their intentions. In games, learners need to express intentions through actions
and providing feedback that is inherent within learning tasks might avoid an over-reliance on
extended verbal feedback (Chow J. , Davids, Button, Renshaw, Shuttlework, & Uehara, 2008).
The use of spatial task constraints may be helpful in this regard, where inherent anchoring can be
used to shape behavior. In invasion games, the use of spatial markers to create channels through
which play must flow can constrain players to create width in attacking play. (Chow J. , Davids,
Button, Renshaw, Shuttlework, & Uehara, 2008).
A key skill for pedagogists is to identify the most important performance aspect that an individual or
a team needs to work on as they progress through the stages of learning. In our view, different
teaching strategies such as tactic-to-skill and skill-to-tactic approaches can each be delivered
effectively by adopting a student-centered approach (Hopper, 2002, cited by Chow J.Y., 2008). Whilst
these approaches have sometimes been proposed as contrasting strategies, in Nonlinear Pedagogy
either may be viable as long as the learner is implicitly challenged within practice to understand the
what to do and how to do it in relation to particular motor skills. For example, in football, learning to
dribble a ball around a set of cones does little to help learners adapt their movement patterns to an
active, moving opponent or the actions of their team-mates. Instead skill execution should occur
within more dynamic scenarios which either represents task simplifications of actual game skills (i.e.,
dribbling around initially passive defenders) or that enhance the frequency of such actions (i.e., extra
points for a goal after a dribbling). An important point is that the skills first approach need not
necessarily imply endless skill repetition within drills that have no tactical context. Skills practice
must occur within a tactical conceptual setting in representative, constrained small games in a TGfU
approach, in a game-like context and not simply through repetition of a movement pattern (Chow J. ,
Davids, Button, Renshaw, Shuttlework, & Uehara, 2008).

13

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

During the coordination and control stages of learning, the emphasis in Nonlinear Pedagogy is for
learners to be provided with plenty of opportunities to explore and discover important information
sources available in the environment to support skill performance and tactical decision making.
This search process is important to promote awareness and enhance functional movement
variability. (Chow J. , Davids, Button, Shuttleworth, Renshaw, & Araújo, 2006).
Importantly, individual differences amongst learners are embraced by a student-centered approach
as opposed to the traditional one-way-fits-all philosophy. As learners advance to the control stage
they become increasingly able to demonstrate flexible, adaptive behaviors in different performance
scenarios. At this time more emphasis may be placed on skill acquisition to satisfy more specific task
constraints during performance. Due to subtle changes in feedback and modifications to coordination
patterns that are required, the learner now requires opportunities to explore a narrower bandwidth
of movement solutions and, in this context, repetition of achieving specific movement outcomes
becomes more valuable (Chow J. , Davids, Button, Shuttleworth, Renshaw, & Araújo, 2006). In
practice, a more pertinent focus is on exploring successful movement solutions with flexibility and
variation in the process to achieve a desired outcome.
For example, if a team is making too many mistakes in exploiting scoring opportunities such as
rushing shooting opportunities, not moving into space to support the ball carrier or not exploiting
width in attack, an important exercise could be to practice small-sided attacking scenarios.
Simplified task constraints could provide opportunities for attackers to practice and improve
scoring skills involved in shooting the ball. (…) In a football example, one such game would
involving playing 5 attackers vs 3 defenders with all players restricted to the middle third of the
practice pitch until an offensive passing option presents itself on either flank to open the game up
into the attacking third of the pitch, allowing attacking runs, spreading of play from one end of the
field to the other or even pulling the defense away from goal area. In the skill stage, it is important
that practice provides opportunities for learners to stabilize effective movement solutions in high
intensity, game-like situations. (Chow J. , Davids, Button, Renshaw, Shuttlework, & Uehara, 2008)
Designing representative task constraints that guide learners to understand key principles of game
playing are key features of TGfU, which are emphasized in Nonlinear Pedagogy. Bunker and Thorpe
(1982) suggested that this principle could be implemented by using modification through
representation or by modification through exaggeration. In Nonlinear Pedagogy it is proposed that
task modifications could be based on an understanding of the key constraints acting on learners in
specific games. There is clearly a need for continued applied pedagogical research as principles of
Nonlinear Pedagogy will be further refined and developed in the coming years, with growing
empirical support from the motor learning literature and beyond. The challenge for researchers is to
extend understanding of how practitioners can explore application of Nonlinear Pedagogy theoretical
concepts in TGfU and game skill learning in physical education, focusing on individual player’s
performance as well as the understanding of game play as a team (Chow J. , Davids, Button,
Renshaw, Shuttlework, & Uehara, 2008).

14

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

C) The structure of exercises and games in football
According to Castelo (2003), the training exercises for football can be classified through a taxonomy
that divides them in exercises either oriented for the development of conditional capacities or
oriented for the development of tactical-technical general or specific requirements.

Football Exercises and Games Taxonomy (Castelo, 2003)

Development of conditioning capacities

Specific training exercises

Without the ball

Enhancing the relation with the ball

Ehancing the relation with the game

a ) Progres s i on on the i nforma ti on
proces s i ng.

1. Offens i ve a cti ons wi thout oppos i ti on.
Us i ng one goa l i n 1v0, 2v0 or 3v0, ...
s i tua ti ons .

b) Anti ci pa ti on of the s peci fi c
a cti ons .

2. Offens i ve a cti ons wi th oppos i ti on
(wi thout defens i ve tra ns i ti on). Us i ng
one goa l i n 1v1, 2v1, 3v1, 3v2, ...
s i tua ti ons .

b) Prepa re the pl a yer for the s es s i on.
c) Acti va te recovery.
d) Enha nce mi ni mum orga ni c functi ona l i ty.
e) Crea te pos i ti ve condi ti ons for i ntermi tent
tra i ni ng exerci s es .

Endurance
Strength

c) Us i ng the di fferent energy
s ources .

Objectives

Specific exercises of general training

3. Ga me (four moments of the ga me).
Us i ng two goa l s i n Gk+1v1+Gk,
Gk+2v2+Gk, Gk+3v3+Gk, ... s i tua ti ons .

d) Enha nci ng s peci fi c emoti ona l
di s tres s .

Speed
Flexibility

Fig. 5 - (Adapted from Castelo, 2003)

The conceptual framework for the football exercises and games organization should always be
supported by the game situations and the internal logic of the game should be reproduced or
simplified so that its fundamental nature could be kept. Such conceptual framework includes five
fundaments: a) reference to real game situations; b) relation to its logical parameters; c)
identification of its objectives; d) inter-relation between activity-player-team; e) competitive
perspective (Castelo, 2003).
Only the exercises and games for the development of the tactical-technical factors can establish
game situations of attack and defense and related transitions, from which the coaches can
manipulate its structural conditions (or constraining the game). The objective of such manipulation is
to adjust the desired player performance (short term and long term) and their attributes in different
levels of development, to the internal logic and complexity of the game (Castelo, 2003). In this
dimension, six main structural conditions or constraints can be used: specific rules, playing space,
technical constraints, time constraints (physiological and decisional), number (players, actions,
touches) and instrumental (training resources).
Designing specific rules for the games and exercises has three main paths: we can simplify the rules
of the game and eliminate some prescriptions (such as offside for example), in a way that we can
create advantages for pre-determined actions to happen (should our central defenders check their
shoulder for information on what is happening in their back?); we can maintain the rules of the
game to better consolidate the players behavior according to the competitive pattern; or we can

15

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

Complexity

Exercises of general training

a ) Is ol a te a s peci fi c condi ti oni ng ca pa ci ty.

Objectives

Development of Tactical-Technical factors

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

have the rules augmented to enhance the frequency of certain actions and behaviors from the
players (i.e. not allowing sliding tackles to make the players stay on their feet in one-on-one duels)
(Castelo, 2003).
The playing space can be manipulated in four main aspects: the pitch dimensions (reduced,
approximate or similar, from the competition standard dimension); geometry (using rectangles,
squares, triangles, circles, according to the desired decision making or tactical action); utilization
(independent - the players are confined to their own space; common – the players can use all the
available space; mixed – only some of the players can use all the space available; interdict –
unavailable spaces for some players in independent, common or mixed pre-existing conditions);
parceling (using only central corridor, as this area creates the better conditions to vary the angle of
attack or defense – it can be divided in sectors according to the team internal organization:
defensive, middle, offensive sectors; using the side corridors, to force the players to use more
frequently the side angles of attack or defense) (Castelo, 2003).
The games and exercises manipulations concerning the technical constraints can be also be divided in
four main aspects: using one, two or more goals (the number and goals position can enhance certain
actions more than others, particularly when it comes to parceling the play in specific moments, add
a specific direction of play and the optimizing finishing angles); using non-dominant foot (optimizing
the technical execution with both feet can benefit the players’ decision making as he can achieve a
higher level of confidence to play in different angles and situations); establishing privileged
interactions (optimizing sectorial players interactions – the back four – or vertical players
interactions – full-back, winger, striker – independently of the organization of the game or exercise);
forcing the direction of the actions (interrupting a certain dynamic of the game and change the
direction of the game or start a new dynamic – interrupting an offensive organization and set up a
counter-attack to test the teams balance) (Castelo, 2003).
To manage the time constraints serves three main purposes: energy production (physiological
purpose), tactical strategy and tactical decision. In the first one, the management of the time of the
game or exercise is related to which energy source we intend our players to use (anaerobic alactic <12’’; anaerobic lactic - <3’; aerobic – longer duration; mixed – intermittent use of energy production
processes). In a strategic perspective, the time management should value the intermediate or final
objectives of the exercise so that the strategical thinking of the players can be modified (scoring on
the early or final seconds of the game, for example). To influence the tactical decision, we can
reduce or augment the time in which a particular game situation should be solved. With this purpose
we can have a constraint on the number of touches per action (less touches=less time), on the team
passing play (less passes=direct approach=less time) or on the time provided for the building up
phases of the play (rush the play into the offensive half or close to the goal).
When we use the numbers as a game constraint we can refer to three particular aspects: the number
of players taking part on the game, the number of touches on the ball per player or the number of
player interactions. Defining the number of players can happen in even, inferiority or superiority
relations between the teams that are taking part of the game (5v5, 5v3, 3v5, 4v4+1). The superiority
or the inferiority relations might be total (5v3 game) or partial (7v7+1 or superiority or inferiority
relations in certain areas of the pitch – side corridors, 16m box, etc.). The manipulation of the
number of the players can have a strong link with the pitch dimensions when we pretend to
influence the time of the actions. We can also enhance a limitation on the number of touches on the
ball for each player taking part of the game. The last constraint about the numbers refers to
enhancing some interactions in favor of others.

16

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Castelo (2003) go further in his conceptualization about the numbers manipulation in games and
exercises, stating that there are some predictable consequences when we introduce these
constraints in its organization. Reducing the number of touches on the ball (1-2 touches) can have
the following effects:
a) Increment of the players’ information processing and decision making;
b) Enhancement of the anticipation attributes and makes the players have a solution before
they receive the ball;
c) Optimization of the technical execution (speed);
d) Enhancement of some tactical-technical patterns in favor of others (passing, receiving, first
touch);
e) Creation of a similar training environment to the logic of the competition level (speed of
decisions and actions);
f) Increment of the rhythm of the game (individually and collectively);
g) Introduction of an emotional distress to the exercises (reason why we shouldn’t keep it for a
long period of time, risking to turning it into a negative aspect);
h) Inhibition of the optimal solution for the perceived game situation;
i) Higher propensity to losing the ball and regaining it as well as to individual mistakes.
The limitation on the number of touches can also be fixed or variable. Each one of these constraints
can bring different consequences. When the limitation of the number of touches is fixed (3 touches):
a)
b)
c)
d)

Increases the technical execution when the defensive pressing is high;
Decrease the technical execution when the defensive pressing is low;
Forces the players to learn time management with the ball (and before receiving the ball);
Gives more opportunity for the players to express themselves (in relation to reducing the
number of touches);
e) Gives the opportunity to the players to develop their individual responsibility of retaining the
ball.
When the limitation of the number of touches is variable (1 or 4 touches):
I.
II.
III.
IV.

Adaptation and adjustment from the tactical-technical behavior according to the game
situation;
Optimization of the players’ initiative and element of surprise;
Difficulty of the defenders reading of the situation and anticipation;
Enhances the time management and the optimal decision making from the attackers;

When there is no limitation on the numbers of touches the players can express more individual
initiative and responsibility, use all their technical attributes freely. There is also more room for
players’ imagination and creative solutions for the problems that the game brings on each moment.
Finally, Castelo (2003) also includes the manipulation of the interactions between the players and for
the teams. It is also possible and effective to have the same limitation prescription for the number of
passes that a team is allowed to perform: if we limit the number of passes for each play, normally we
accelerate the collective patterns of the team and turn the game more direct. On the other hand, if
we increase the number of passes, we turn the game more indirect and focused on the moments of
possession. One of the most important aspects of these constraints is that we should always keep
the intern logic of the game intact (why should a player pass the ball to a teammate if he is on the
goal line one second away from scoring a goal?).

17

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

III.

2014-2015

Problem definition

The problem definition is defined according to the objectives that we defined in the introduction
chapter. With our report we aim to:
a) To translate the information provided by NCFE to a pragmatic training approach on the pitch;
b) Through the processing of the previous point, create and organize conditioned games that
could enhance incidental (implicit) learning in the wingers.
The starting questions are mostly related with what and how we intend to achieve such aims:
-

How can we translate the data collection about the specific role of a winger into a set of
considerations about how to prepare the players for such role?
What kind of games we believe can maximize the wingers’ development?

We are capable to preview before we start this report that the translation of the numbers will be
possible, as it’s a regular practice in professional and top level coaching environments. Still, there are
some challenges that we can anticipate concerning the first question:
a) Usually such translation from the numbers (or stats) to the training ground is applied to a
specific playing style or game approach and in consequence to the players involved in such
dynamic. Can we do it for one specific role?
b) The translation should be done in a pragmatic way. How can we design a matrix that can
capture the coaches enthusiasm instead of pushing them way?
The second objective is far more complicated to achieve. Traditionally the coaches rely on their direct
instruction to enhance the players’ behavior in a set of game situations. Even in training game
situations (7v7, 8v8, undertall or overtall), the coach directive approach is seen as strictly necessary
for the decision making of the players to be adjusted to what is happening on the pitch. There is no
reason for us to believe that in the case of a specific role development it would happen otherwise (go
here, do that, cross now). What we believe and is reflected in our second objective is that the
efficiency of the actions of the winger (according to the NCFE numbers) can be accomplished with
specific game constraints that will enhance the frequency of the desired actions, in an implicit way,
and therefore increase the chances of memory retention. As to the previous objective, some
challenges can be anticipated:
a) How can we control (and evaluate) the impact of the game constraints on the development
of the players?
b) How can we decrease the high level of retroaction - time between our input and the desired
outcome (the impact of the game constraints is not as immediate as the direct instruction
and feedback)?
At the end of our report our expectations are to achieve possible answers to our research questions
and to our challenges, or, at least, to provide more sophisticated questions for further research or
critical reflection.

18

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

IV.

2014-2015

Methodology

The Norwegian Centre of Football Excellence (NFCE) or Norsk Toppfotballsenter (TFS) was launched
by the Norwegian Football Association and the Norwegian Professional Football League in 2009 as a
knowledge-, competency-, and expertise hub that will ensure top international quality on Norwegian
elite player development. Since January 2013, the league took over as the sole owner of the Centre,
shifting the primary focus towards the development of players in Norway's 32 elite clubs. Hence, the
current result ambition is to establish the Norwegian Professional League among the top-12 in the
UEFA club ranking. A detailed look on the NCFE purpose is presented below.

Strategically, NCFE strives towards this aim through four distinct modes of
operation:
1)

Collaboration

Acknowledging that Norway is a small country competing with giants,
NCFE aims to find and utilize productive relationships and collaborations,
professionally and politically, with national institutions (e.g., the top
clubs, the Norwegian FA, and universities) and international institutions
(e.g., UEFA, FIFA, international top clubs, and universities).;
2)

Research and documentation

NCFE leads a long series of innovative scientific projects aimed at
producing cutting-edge empirical documentation of what international
top class players, teams, and coaches, as well as the Norwegian
equivalents, are doing.
3)

Competence development

NCFE is constantly, systematically, and creatively searching to learn from
international best practice on player and performance development,
predominantly from top European football clubs, but also from other
sports and performance domains.
4)

Competence exchange

NCFE translates, communicates and exchanges competence with
Norwegian elite football players, teams, and coaches – with the purpose
of turning data, information, and knowledge into actual player and
performance development. Specifically, NCFE assists all the Norwegian
top clubs directly with player development and runs a series of coach
development workshops and courses, and NCFE supports more specific
match preparation for the clubs participating in the European cups.
(Jordet, 2014)

The NCFE report Kompetansekrav i Rolle has a decisive impact on how we chose to approach our
theme. In such report, information has been collected through video analysis about top players’
performances in the World Cup 2014 in Brazil. A large amount of match videos have been observed,
discussed and dissected into the most pragmatic information possible. A vast and multi-faceted set of
resources and references11 are integrated in an overview of each player position on the pitch, their
role definition and specific competence. The player roles that this report refers to includes the
Goalkeeper, the Central Defender, the Full-Back, The Central Midfielder (and its stereotypes), the
Playmaker, the Winger and the Striker. In our report we decided to have a closer look on the role of
the winger. As for all the other role analysis, the structure of the report comprehends different (yet

19

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

complemental) angles of analysis. Both offensive and defensive attributes for each position are
described, as well as specific game situations and the nature and the type of actions. It’s this last
aspect that is more important for the methodology of our report. We believe that an in depth study
of this set of actions can provide a reference for the organization of exercises and games in training.
Video support is set to clarify the phases on the trefase modell that we present below.

Assist/setter opp trussel mot/i slottet


Stor handlingsfleksibilitet med ball



Repertoar for å håndtere ballen på pressede rom- og

Scorer mål/utnytter trussel mot/i slottet


Utgangsposisjonering, vinne scoringsrom,
scoringen

tidsforhold


Spillsituasjon

«1v1»



Etter innlegg



Repertoar for å nå ulike rom ved innlegg



Bakrom lite rom



Bakrom



Rom mellom spillere



Vinkel/avstand til keeper og grad av press



Rom foran bakre «ledd»



Bakrom stort rom



Scoringstrussel



Vinkel/avstand til keeper og grad av press



Evne til å sette opp og inngå i kombinasjonsspill



The magic pass



Retur/2.ball



Skape trusselbilde gjennom bevegelse uten ball (2A/3A)



Skudd etter føring/dribling



Utnytte/skape og utnytte rom sentralt/korridor,



Skudd etter pasning i ledd/foran ledd



Dødball siste 1/3-del



Sette opp «rikt» trusselbilde med ball i samhandling



bakrom/rom i bakre ledd/mellomrom


Timing: samtidige bevegelser, åpne/lukke rom, motsatte
bevegelser, posisjonsbytte, tredjemanns bevegelser

20

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

The main attributes described by NCFE for the winger are presented above. Our task of translating
the numbers for the training ground will only be focus on the offensive moment, more particularly
when the winger assists or scores. We reproduced the attributes for that specific moment of the
game. Additional information on profiling refers to the different type of wingers. In Kantstereotypi,
seven types of wingers are presented: The Speedster, Raumdeuter, 1v1, Roaming Playmaker, The
Killer Crosser, The Trickster and The Worker. It is not our intention to study with depth this aspect of
our theme, as it depends from variables which description would make our report to dense and away
from its main purpose (individual specific attributes, team playing style, team formation, game
strategies, etc.). However, this is still information that we can use as a discussion further on. Our
methodology is, therefore, based in documentation analysis, literature study that can result in a
research-oriented product to use in the coaching practice. For that matter we purpose the
construction of the following matrixes of analysis.

The specific information of each phase
of analysis is presented through charts
and graphics. Such information is
reproduced (in Norwegian as its
original version) on the top of the
matrix.
To make the matrix complete, we
will also provide a visual help, to
better preview the game
organization on the pitch. The
games were designed with a free
uploaded exercise planning software
(SoccerSketch).

There are three points of analysis on each matrix: a) our
own numbers interpretation (guidelines for the previous
two points); b) the criteria that will be followed to define
the games objectives; and c) the game constraints or
conditions that are designed to achieve such objectives
(in grey background).

The NCFE designed a three phase model for each
particular action. Such model comprehends the moments
before, during and at the end of each tactical-technical
execution. Such phases are the title of each matrix.

It was our concern that these matrixes could be designed in a way that all the information analyzed
could be concentrated in one single sheet (according to each specific phase or angle). It pretends to
offer clear and pragmatic information and a visual help to better exemplify the game organization on
the pitch. We will also provide a portfolio attached to our report where all the matrixes – as well as a
general overview – will be organized. A digital version of the Excel file will also be one of the
attachments.

21

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

V.

2014-2015

Data Analysis

The NTCE Kompetansekrav i rolle – Kantspillere was presented in the 25th Cupfinaleseminar in Oslo
last November. The report includes 60 slides with statistical information about type of actions,
patterns and specific characteristics of the wingers. We have selected the information that is more
relevant for the purpose of translating the numbers into the training ground. As we referred before
we will only focus on the offensive moments, more particularly when the winger assists or scores.
The elements of analysis are presented below.
Movement before
the ball
Assists - Phases 1-3

From opportunity to
reality
The decisive pass

Assists
Movement before
the ball
Crosses - Phases 1-3

Winger

From opportunity to
reality
The decisive pass
Finding the starting
position

Goals

Goals - Phases 1-3

Conquering the space

Finishing

The wingers’ Assists and the Goals are analyzed through a Trefase modell which aims to divide the
wingers’ actions before receiving the ball, with the ball and his last action (passing or shooting). For
the Assists analysis the Phase 1 – Movement before the ball comprehends two angles of approach:
where is the opposition and where does the winger go for the ball; In Phase 2 – From opportunity
to reality, the analysis comprehends four elements: distance to pressing, type of action, time with
the ball and number of touches; In Phase 3 – The decisive pass, the distance to pressing, the type of
passing, from where is the pass coming and who is receiving the pass (and where) are the elements
of analysis. For the Assists through Crosses analysis, the Phase 1 comprehends the elements where is
the opposition and where does the winger go for the ball; In Phase 2 – From opportunity to reality
the elements of analysis are the distance to pressing, type of action, time with the ball and number
of touches; In Phase 3 – The decisive pass the analysis focuses on the pressing distance, the type of
touch and from where is coming the crossing. For the wingers’ Goals analysis Phase 1 – Finding the
starting position the following elements are analyzed: where is the opposition, starting position in
relation to the closest defender, to the area of the pitch and to the space in the opposition
structure. In Phase 2 – Conquering the space, we analyze how the winger wins the space and in the
Phase 3 we analyze the type of finishing and its areas and target zones.

22

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

A) Wingers’ goal assists
Phase 1 – Movement before the ball
Attributes description
1.
2.
3.
4.

Finn timing for å komme inn i rom på riktig tid, reposisjoner om nødvendig;
Finn optimal ”høyde” i rommet og posisjon som skaper tvil hos motstander ift hvem 1.F
Søk rettvendt kroppsposisjon før første berøring
Søk posisjoner for å utnytte kompetanse (egen, med- og mot - spiller)
Kompetansekrav i roller – Kantspillere (TFS, 2014)

In relation to the opponent

KANT - ASSIST ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 1: KOMME PÅ BALL

Numbers
interpretation

Games
constraints or
conditions

23

When the winger is coming
A minimum of 5m space
The wingers' movement
for the ball to perform an
The wingers' movement
The winger is putting
between the two last
before an assist is coming
assist, half of the times 10before an assist is coming himself into congestioned
defensive lines is needed
mostly when the
20m separates the
mostly when the opposite areas before he receives
to trigger the wingers'
opposition is balanced
defensive line from the
defense is falling back.
the ball (68,2%)
appeal for the ball (85%).
(numerical).
goal line (52%).
Each team needs a
The counter-attack
The pitch dimension for
sufficient number of
moments should be
The B4 should be
The area where the ball is
the game has to consider a players to form a system
prevented to happen so
organized and moving
should concentrate the
minimum of 10m space in
with two lines (for the
that the established
close to their own goal.
majority of the players.
bakrom during the play.
winger to explore
attacks are more frequent.
mellomrom ).
Pitch dimensions: 45x35m Tactical technical
use the box for better
constraint for the teams: 3
Game form: Gk+7v7+Gk
attacking reference.
players locked in own half
Formation 1-4-3 or 1-4-1-2.
Playing against two 11-awhen in possession of the
side goals.
ball.

Dutch rule: the game
always re-start from the
goalkeeper.

Tactical-technical
constraint for the teams:
Positional defending only
allowed in two corridors.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Where the winger receives the ball

KANT - ASSIST ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 1: KOMME PÅ BALL

Numbers
interpretation

Games
constraints or
conditions

24

When the winger comes to the ball, he is most of the times towards the The movement of the winger before he receives
goal. His wide positioning can be one of the factors that has a big
the ball to assist varys between a forward run, a
contribution to this observation. Still, 45% of the areas where the winger wide movement or an inside run. The higher
move into are in the central corridor (with variable distances to the goal).
incidence is in the first two movements.
The majority of the wingers' movements are in the offensive half. The
Dropping down to receive the ball is also an
mellomrom is the only sector with all the areas covered on the moment option, but with less frequency than the three
that the winger gets the ball.
previous.
The games should enhance the frequency of the situations where the
winger can receive the ball towards the goal (games with direction).
The pitch dimensions should allow the winger
Using an extra player for the team in possession of the ball can prevent
to vary his movements in length and width. Each
the defending team from man marking giving more opportunities for the
team needs a sufficient number of players to
winger to receive the ball facing the goal. The wingers' actions should
form a system with two lines (for the winger to
happen with higher frequency in the offensive half, spread through
be able to explore mellomrom ).
every area, but with higher incidence in bothcorridors and in
mellomrom.
Tactical-technical
Pitch dimensions:
constraint for the
Tactical-technical constraint for the wingers:
45x35m - use the box
Game form: Gk+7v7+Gk
winger: one touch in right foot winger on the left and left foot winger for better attacking
+ Jk. Formation: 1-4-3 or
the defensive half, free
on the right (enabling the winger to use
reference. Playing
1-4-1-2.
touches in the
mellomrom).
against two 11-a-side
offensive half.
goals.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Phase 2 – From the opportunity to reality
Attributes description
1.
2.

Vær oppdatert på mulige rom og medspiller(e) før første berøring.
Evne å kontrollere ballen under ekstremt pressede rom- og tidsforhold:
a. Kort avstand mellom ball og kropp; være beredt til å gripe ”rett rom til rett tid”
b. Kort tid mellom første og andre berøring
c. Ro å plukke opp riktig signal og kjenne igjen mønster i spillet/hva skjer, og når.
Finn optimal timing (tid/rom i samhandling)
Kompetansekrav i roller – Kantspillere (TFS, 2014)

3.

Opponents’ pressing, type of actions, time with the ball and number of touches

KANT - ASSIST ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 2: FRA MULIGHET TIL REALITET

Numbers
interpretation

Games
constraints or
conditions

The type of actions are diverse.
75% of the situations when the
1-4 seconds is the amount of time
Turning and passing are the less
winger aims to assist, the distance
that the winger uses with the ball
60,7% in the assists situations the
frequent actions of the winger with
from the pressing defender is 1-3m.
when assisting to goal (77,7%). This winger has 1-3 touches on the ball.
the ball just before the assist (due to
However, in 14% of the situations the
can reveal a tactical decision (what to Still the numbers of touches on the
the receiving body angle towards the
defender is 6m away (Fast variation
do) before he receives the ball or a
ball are diverse (from 1-9).
goal). The two touch type of actions
of the center of the game?)
tigh distance from the defender(s).
are the more frequent ones (67%).
The game should enhance a higher
The game should enhance all the
concentration of players around the
types of actions from the winger. The game should enhance less time and less touches for each player. Quick
ball carrier and the winger, but still
Some actions can be encourage more decision making is required. Smaller pitch dimension and fewer players can
provide the opportunity to allow
than others depending on the player
provide such type of actions.
enough space between 1A and 1F in
characteristics.
some occasions.
Game form: Gk+5v5+Gk.

25

Tactical-technical constraints for the players: 1) positional defending only
allowed in two corridors; 2) have to use both feet in all actions with more
than one touch 3) touch limitation: 1 or 3 touches.

Pitch dimensions: 35x25m. Playing
against two 11-a-side goals.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Phase 3 – The decisive passing
Attributes description
1.
2.
3.
4.

Evne å forløse riktig rom til riktig tid
Ha bredt tilslagsrepertoar med tyngdepunkt på innsidepasning
Ha et kamuflerende element
Presisjon og optimal vekting av pasningen
Kompetansekrav i roller – Kantspillere (TFS, 2014)

Opponents’ pressing, type of passing and from where the winger assists

KANT - ASSIST ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 3: DEN AVGJORENDE PASNING

Numbers
interpretation

Games constraints
or conditions

26

In the decisive pass moment the
closest opposition is between 12m in 89% of the situations. This
numbers can be related with the
areas of the pitch where the
pass is coming from (last third).

The passing with the inside foot in the most used
type of passing used by the wingers when
assisting. Half of the decisice passes are
The decisive pass is made from the last third in the
camuflaged and its relation with the type of
majority of the situations (91%). The left and central
passing becomes logical if we consider the best corridors are the most covered areas in this situation.
body angle for its execution (inside foot camuflage).

The game should enhance an
intense defensive pressing on
the ball carrier. Higher pressing
means less time and space for
the ball carrier to perform the
better passing.

The wingers should be incentivated to use the
side corridors. Using side positions as attack
starting points can be used as a tool to enhance
the use of inside foot for assisting (opposite side
as well).

A formation with 2 or 3 lines is needed in a way that
the ball carrier has lees time and space. It's also
important that each line has enough number of
players to cover a higher width (midline with 3
players).

Extra points for first touch
finishing in the box (first touch
finishing is dependent of top
class assist).

Tactical-technical constraints for the wingers
team: attack 11-a-side goal and defend two 5-aside goals in the corners (if the wingers have to
defend the sides, then the offensive transition
starts with the whole pitch in front of them).

Pitch dimensions: 40x60m
Game form: Gk+8v8. (or full width). Use the box
Suggested formation: (1)as reference. Playing
4-3-1.
against one 11-a-side and
ywo 5-a-side goals.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Who scores after the assist and from where

KANT - ASSIST ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 3: DEN AVGJORENDE PASNING

Numbers
interpretation

Conditions and rules
for games (frequency

The striker is the player that scores the most when the winger is
assisting. The opposite wingers, the midfielders are other players that
also have some proeminence on scoring when the winger is assisting. A
relation between the type of assist and who is scoring would be a
variable that could contribute more for a pattern recognition.

Independently from who is scoring, the
finishing areas when the assist is coming from
the wingers are mainly inside the box and
within a privileged finishing angle towards the
goal.

The interaction between the winger and the striker should be prioritized
in the game.

The finishing inside the 16m box should be
prioritized in the game, particularly when the
winger is assisting.

of actions and suggested Game form: Gk+6v6+Gk Tactical-technical constraints: 1) First touch
conditions)
finishing goal inside the 16m box=extra points;
+ 2 jkrs. Suggested
formation: (1)-2-3-1.

27

2) wingers are used as jokers;

Pitch dimensions: 50x40m using box as
reference. Playing against two 11-a-side goals.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

B) Wingers’ crossing situations
Phase 1 – Movement before the ball
Attributes
1.
2.
3.
4.

Finn timing for å komme inn i rom på riktig tid, reposisjoner om nødvendig;
Finn optimal ”høyde” i rommet og posisjon som skaper tvil hos motstander ifht. hvem 1.F;
Søk rettvendt kroppsposisjon før første berøring;
Søk posisjoner for å utnytte kompetanse (egen, med- og mot - spiller).
Kompetansekrav i roller – Kantspillere (TFS, 2014)

In relation to the opponent

KANT - INNLEGG ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 1: KOMME PÅ BALL

Numbers
interpretation

The distance in mellomrom
Before the crossing the
In the majority of the
is in most situations 5-10m The distance behind the
winger is moving into
When the winger is
situations when the
(higher than observed for defensive line is mostly
areas were there is a
moving into a crossing
winger is moving before
the assists). Potentially,
between 10 to 20m. This
normal or small
position the opposite team
crossing the ball the B4 are
when the crossing is
distance gives the winger
concentration of players (is is balanced in the majority
falling towards their own
coming the distance
opportunity to vary the
the small concentration
of the situations.
goal.
between lines (b4 and
type of crossing.
due to switch of play?).
midline is 5-10m).

The counter-attack
The game should enhance
The defensive
situations should be
fast breaks (fast transition
The game should provide
concentration on the
avoided in the game (fast moments against balanced The games' playing area
the opportunity for the
center of the game should
transitions against
and organized opposition).
should provide the
winger to explore the
vary so that the winger can unbalanced opposition), so
The defensive line is
opportunity for the winger
Conditions and rules defensive lines vertical
experience different
that the winger can
organized, but the
to take advantage of a 10movements (push up/fall
for games (frequency
relations of time and
experience playing against
remaining lines are
20m distance in bakrom .
down).
space.
established and balanced unstructured (more space i
of actions and suggested
defensive structures.
mellomrom ?)
conditions)
Tactical-technical constraints: 1) Dutch Rule adaptation - the game re-starts with
coaches ball on the sideline; 2) delimited side corridors; 3) Defending team can
only play in two corridors; 4) Game

28

Pitch dimensions: 40x40m
Game form: Gk+6v6+Gk.
using box as reference.
Suggested formation: 1-3-3
Playing against two 11-aor 1-2-3-1.
side goals.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Where the winger receives the ball and movement before the ball

KANT - INNLEGG ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 1: KOMME PÅ BALL

When the winger is moving into crossing positions he is always facing the The movments of the winger are mostly to create
goal. His movements are mostly close to the sidelines and on the last
width and to move forward on the pitch. The
third. The movements to get the ball on the inside left areas of the pitch relation between the areas to where the winger
are observed in 16% of the situations. The inside right areas have no
is moving and the type of movement is
observed situations.
coincident (width=sidelines).

Numbers
interpretation

Conditions and
rules for games
(frequency of
actions and
suggested
conditions)

29

The game should enhance the situations where the winger can receive
the ball towards the goal. His movements on the last third and in the side
corridors should be prioritized.

The game should have adjusted dimensions to
provide a high frequency of two type of
movements from the winger (verticality and
width).

Tactical-technical constraints: 1) Dutch Rule - the
Game form: Gk+2v2+Gk Playing against two 11- game re-starts with Gks' ball; 2) delimited side
corridors; 3) wingers as the jokers on the sidelines;
+ 2 Jk.
a-side goals.
4) touch limitation for the wingers (1-3).

Pitch dimensions:
20x45m using box as
reference.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Phase 2 – From the opportunity to reality
Attributes
1.
2.
3.

4.

Vær oppdatert på mulige rom og medspiller(e) før første berøring;
Evne å plukke opp riktig signal og kjenne igjen mønster i spillet/hva skjer, og når;
Evne å kontrollere ballen under ekstremt pressede rom- og tidsforhold:
a. Kort avstand mellom ball og kropp; være beredt til å gripe ”rett rom til rett tid”
b. Kort tid mellom første og andre berøring
c. Ro
Finn optimal timing (tid/rom i samhandling)
Kompetansekrav i rolle – Kantspillere (TFS, 2014)

Pressing, type of actions, time with the ball and number of touches

KANT - INNLEGG ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 2: FRA MULIGHET TIL REALITET

Numbers
interpretation

There are not many observed
76% of the observed situations the
When the winger receives the ball The type of actions is diverse and situations where the winger has
winger is using four or less touches
for the crossing the defensive
variable, but with particular
the ball more than 5''. The 1'' and
on the ball before the crossing. Do
pressing is most of the times 2-3m incidence on one touch crossing or
2'' situatons can favor the one
other situations mean individual
away (67%).
crossing after dribbling (56%).
touch crossing and receiveactions before the crossing?
crossing.

Conditions and
rules for games

The game should enhance a
defensive pressing on the winger
in the moment of the crossing.

The game should provide the
opportunity for the winger to use
different actions before the
crossing.

Pitch dimensions: 60x45m using
box as reference. Playing against
two 11-a-side goals.

Game form: Gk+7v7+Gk.
Formations: 1-4-3 or 1-3-1-3.

(frequency of
actions and
suggested
conditions)

30

The game should increase the
speed of the wingers' decision
making in the crossing situation
(how and when to cross?).

The game should provide the
opportunity for the winger to link
the number of touches to the type
of crossing (early perception of the
finishing opportunities?)

Tactical-technical constraints: 1) delimited side corridors; 2) goal after a
backwards crossing=extra points; 2) Dutch Rule - the game re-starts
with Gks' ball; 4) touch limitation for side corridors=1 touch.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Phase 3 – The decisive passing
Attributes
1.
2.
3.
4.

Evne å forløse riktig rom til riktig tid;
Ha bredt tilslagsrepertoar med tyngdepunkt på innsidepasning;
Ha et kamuflerende element;
Presisjon og optimal vekting av pasningen.
Kompetansekrav i rolle – Kantspillere (TFS, 2014)

From where on the pitch, pressing and type of crossing

KANT - INNLEGG ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 3: DEN AVGJORENDE PASNING

In the crossing moment the
defensive pressing towards
the winger is at 1-3m distance,
with more incidence on 1m
(44%) and 2m (38%) distances.

Numbers
interpretation

Conditions and rules
for games (frequency

The winger is crossing with higher incidence on
the last third. Ca. 30% of the crossing is inside
the 16m box. The area with more incidence is
outside the box within an horizontal line from
the penalty mark.

The wingers should have the opportunity to roam into
The goals after a crossing
both corridors to take advantage of the best
The game should enhance the wingers' crossing
should be prioritized in the
positioning to cross with the inside foot. The number
from pre-defined zones (and to pre-defined
game. Such condition can
of finishing options should also be enhanced so that target zones?). A variation of early/late crosses
increase the defensive
the winger can add a camuflage element to his
and outside/inside 16m box.
pressing in a crossing attempt.
crossing.

of actions and suggested
conditions)
Pitch dimensions: 30x45m
using box as reference.

31

The inside foot is the type of touch more used in the
crossing moment. 44% is crossing on the ground and
38% is crossing with… In 40% of the situations the
crossing has a camuflage element.

Tactical-technical constraints: 1) 2 delimited side
corridors where only the jokers can play at maximum 2 Playing against two 11- Game form: Gk+4v4+Gk
touches; 2) Dutch Rule - the game re-starts with Gks'
a-side goals.
+ 2 Jkrs (winger).
ball; 3) first touch goals=extra points;

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

2014-2015

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

Where the crossing is going, who is scoring and where

KANT - INNLEGG ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 3: DEN AVGJORENDE PASNING

The winger uses the last defensive line as a
In 56% of the crossing
reference for where to place the crossing. 44%
situations from the winger, the
When the winger is crossing the goals are scored
of the crossing is to use the space between the
striker is the player that is
inside the 5m box (ca. 44%) and in the central
defenders in the line, 44% of the crossing is
scoring. The opposite wingers
area of the 16m box (50%). 6,3 % of the goals
betweeen the Gk and the defensive line and
represent 31% of the situations
scored after crossing are outside the box.
13% of the crossing goes in front of the
and the midfielders 12%.
defensive line.

Numbers
interpretation

The interaction between the
winger and the striker should
be prioritized in the game.

Conditions and rules
for games (frequency
of actions and suggested
conditions)

32

The game should provide the opportunity for
the wingers to cross from different areas. Early
or late crosses can enhance its direction and
vary the target zone.

The game should prioritize the finishing inside
the 16m box after a crossing, but still provide
the possibility for finishing outside of the box.

Tactical-technical constraints: 1) 2 delimited
side corridors where only the wingers can play
Pitch dimensions: 30x50m using at maximum 2 touches in the attacking phase; 2) Playing against two 11Dutch Rule - the game re-starts with Gks' ball; 3)
box as reference.
a-side goals.
goal in the 5m box=extra points; 4) goal outside
the 16m box=extra points.

Game form:
Gk+5v5+Gk.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

C) Wingers’ scoring sequence
Phase 1 – Finding the scoring space
Attributes
1.
2.
3.
4.

Søk posisjon som gir deg tilgang til scoringsrommet;
Søk posisjon som kamuflerer inngang til scoringsrom;
Reposisjoner deg - når situasjonsbildet endres;
Søk posisjoner for å utnytte kompetanse (egen, med- og mot - spiller).
Kompetansekrav i rolle – Kantspillere (TFS, 2014)

In relation to the opponent

KANT - SCORINGSSEKVENSE ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 1: FINNE UTGANGSPOSISJON

Numbers
interpretation

When the winger is
starting to move to his
scoring position, the last
defensive line is falling
back towards their own
goal (71%).

When the winger is starting to move into a scoring
The winger starts his movement to score mostly when position, the distance between the defensive line and
there are low concentration of players (42%). Still, 52% the midfielders line is variable, although there is more
of the times the area around the ball is congestioned. incidence on a 5-10m distance. In 50% of the times the
In 25% of the times the winger takes advantage of the
winger is moving into scoring position, the space
unbalance in the opposition when moving into scoring
behind the defenders has between 10 to 20m.
positions. Still, for 75% of the times the other team is However there is also a large incidence of the wingers'
numerical balanced.
movements when the bakrom has more than a 30m
distance to the goal line.

The playing area should be
The winger should have the opportunity to explore the
adjusted to the presence
The game should provide the opportunity for the
space between and behind defensive lines. The
of a defensive line with 3-4
winger to explore different levels of defensive
distance to the goal should be adjusted to the fact that
defenders and enough
concentration.
However,
in
both
situations
achieving
a
Conditions and rules
exploring both spaces are rewarded with a finishing
length for defensive
finishing position should be the main focus.
for games (frequency movements (push up and
opportunity.
of actions and suggested
fall down).

conditions)
Pitch dimensions: 30x40m
using box as reference.

33

Tactical-technical constraints: 1) Dutch Rule - the game
re-starts with Gks' ball; 2) Zonal surplus (opposition
Playing against two 11-ateam from the winger has one more player in
side goals.
defensive half).

Game form: Gk+6v5+Gk.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Direct opponent and from where the winger finds the finishing space

KANT - SCORINGSSEKVENSE ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 1: FINNE UTGANGSPOSISJON

Numbers
interpretation

Conditions and
rules for games
(frequency of
actions and
suggested
conditions)

34

In the wingers' starting position to scoring the
The wingers' scoring
The wingers' starting position before scoring has
closest players are the wide players (fullbacks, starting position is mostly
diverse incidence (6 areas). However, the higher
wingbacks, wingers). Still in 18% of the times on the offensive half with
incidence is in the space in the last defensive line
the closest player is the central midfielder (is
a high incidence in the
(34%) and in mellomrom (55%).
the winger starting from inside?).
central corridor (89%).
The game should enhance the opposition
relation between the winger and the opposite The game should give the The winger should have the opportunity to explore
wide player, particularly the fullback. It's
different spaces in the game, but with intention to
opportunity ffor the
important that the winger can have a similar
og to the goal whenever possible. Two defensive
winger to prioritize the
type of resistance in training as he has in the play in the offensive half.
lines should be organized.
match.
Tactical-technical constraint: 1) Man marking
Pitch dimensions: 30x40m Playing against two 11- Game form: Gk+5v5+Gk.
zones - offensive half or defensive half (mixed
using box as reference.
a-side goals.
Formations: 1-2-3 or 1-3-2.
defensive method);

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Phase 2 – Conquering the scoring space
Attributes
1.
2.
3.

Kamufler inngangen til scoringsrom;
Finn optimal timing (tid/rom i samhandling);
Lese ballbanen og justere bevegelse underveis.
Kompetansekrav i rolle – Kantspillere (TFS, 2014)

Type of actions

KANT - SCORINGSSEKVENSE ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 2: VINNE SCORINGSROM

Numbers
interpretation

To conquer the scoring space the winger uses 6 diffferent type of actions with a significant incidence in almost all of them.
The ones that are more frequent are a high intensity run , a change of rythm and pace , his accurate positioning in the space
and multidirectional movements .

Conditions and
rules for games

The game should provide the opportunity for the winger to focus on different ways to conquer the space and to use his
different attributes. The area of play should have an adjusted dimensions to the type of actions that are required. Such
actions have different physical and tactical-technical demands.

(frequency of
actions and
suggested
conditions)

35

Pitch dimensions:
20x40m (whole box
width).

Game form:
Gk+2v2+Gk.

Tactical-technical constraints: 1) the game rePlaying against two 11starts from diagonal angles; 2) touch limitation a-side goals.
max 3 touch.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Phase 3 – Finishing
Attributes
1.

Handling & handlingsvalg for siste berøring(er) ved scoring.
Kompetansekrav i rolle – Kantspillere (TFS, 2014)

Pressing, repertoire, number of touches

KANT - SCORINGSSEKVENSE ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 3: SCORINGEN

Numbers
interpretation

Conditions and rules
for games (frequency
of actions and suggested
conditions)

36

When the winger is
scoring the defensive
pressing on the
moment of the first
touch is mostly
between 1-2m (84%)

The winger is scoring more on first touch as the distance to the goal gets
The winger is scoring
closer (80%-56%-25%). On the opposite hand, the scoring after two
more often with his touches happen more often as the distance to the goal gets further (20%inside foot (47%) and 30%-37,5%). Only between 5-16m and outside the 16m box the winger is
with his instep (31%). using three touches to score (11%, 12,5%). Four or more touches are used
with high incidence outside the 16m.

The game should
The game should provide a higher frequency of
The game should provide the opportunity to
provide an intense
positions roaming so that the winger can look adjust the type of finishing (and the number of
defensive pressing on
for the best area to finish with his inside foot or
touches) to specific areas on and around the
the moment of
instep.
16m box.
finishing.

Pitch dimensions:
30x20m using the box
as reference.

Game form:
Gk+4v4+Gk.

Playing against two 11a-side goals.

Technical constraints for the winger: one touch
finishing inside 16m box=extra points; 2) Long
shot finishing (outside 16m box)=extra points.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Zones of finishing and targeting

KANT - SCORINGSSEKVENSE ETTER TREFASE MODELL - FASE 3: SCORINGEN

Numbers
interpretation

Conditions and rules
for games (frequency
of actions and suggested
conditions)

37

The wingers are placing their shots in every area of the goal. However
The wingers are scoring 82% of their goals inside
the highest incidence is in low placed shots (64%). The right low corner is
the box. 74% of this goals are in privileged
the area with higher incidence. We have no information if it is the close
finishing angles towards the goal.
or the far corner from the shooting position.
The game should provide the opportunity for
The winger should be incentivated to shot and hit the target, as the
the winger to attempt finishing inside the box in
incidence of the area where the shots are placed is broad. However, the
every possible angle. However, the area of play
low corners and the low placed shots should be prioritized (play safe
should consider also the area on the edge of the
finishing?)
box.
Pitch dimensions:
20x20m using the box
as reference.

Game form:
Gk+3v3+Gk.

Technical constraints for the winger (and for all
Playing against two 11players?): 1) shots out of target=10''suspension;
a-side goals.
2) goal with non-dominant foot=extra points.

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

VI.

2014-2015

Discussion

A) Matching the report objective(s)
When we started our report two objectives where defined: a) to translate the information provided
by NCFE to a pragmatic training approach on the pitch; b) in the processing of the previous point,
create and organize conditioned games that could engage the wingers in a process of implicit
learning. The NCFE report refers to the game situations observed in the World Cup 2014. It’s very
important to define this context. Within this information we can read the more frequent actions
from elite level wingers performed in one of the highest levels of competition in the football world.
Reading this type of information provides a reference for the development of a role that we expect
can decide a football match. Our initial thoughts about the translation of this information to the
training ground guided us to create a game centered approach that could enhance the type of
actions that are more effective at top level. Several points of discussion emerge from this starting
point. We want to underline two of them that are useful to approach in our discussion:
a) Why not read the wingers’ references and create a training approach where the attributes are
trained isolated, hoping that the sum of such isolated parts could create the necessary “package”
for the matches?
We could more pragmatically observe where in the pitch the crossing is more frequent and/or
effective and organize an exercise that can promote a certain amount of repetitions that can
enhance its reproduction in a game situation. We could also observe how is the winger scoring more
often and where and, like the previous example, promote another exercise that could engage the
winger in such repetitive action. The game, however, is made of players’ decisions that, once
occurring in a chain of events, will permanently influence one another and result in the game play.
When we isolate the training from such chain of events and only attempt to reproduce its isolated
parts, we put at risk the development of a repertoire that can be used effectively in the game, when
the game has its various demands. The picture from Mordillos’ football skills can be a good
illustration of this skill isolation. Therefore, our intention was to invest our energy in creating game
constraints that could enhance the frequency of the actions that we pretended to use as references
for the wingers. Nonetheless, because individual differences amongst learners are embraced by a
student-centered approach as opposed to the traditional one-way-fits-all philosophy, it’s important
that the individual execution that rates the performance can remain open and adjustable to the
players’ particular motor patterns. As learners advance to the control stage they become increasingly
able to demonstrate flexible, adaptive behaviors in different performance scenarios.
The second angle in this discussion is the emotional distress that we need to add to the training. Has
we already stated in our conceptual framework definition, the game is the situation in training that
we know the players will be emotionally involved. The level of engagement in training can be
achieved in various and different ways, but playing a game will more naturally add an emotional
distress that is necessary to experience when we prepare the players for a formal competition. A
game centered approach to training is the logical way to embrace Damásios’ lessons on reason and
emotion. We need our emotions to decide better and more effectively. The high variability of the
games and exercises are, therefore, a tool to achieve a more effective decision making in our players.
Although Castelo (2003) acknowledges different types of exercises in his taxonomy, when it comes to
the development of tactical-technical factors and the relation to the game, his suggestions are based
mostly in how we can manipulate the game to achieve the objectives that we define. Finally, is also
important to underline that a game centered approach to training has also the openness of letting

38

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

something happening that was not previously under prediction. The game situation that we aim to
train can be reinvented by the players. As stated by Chow (2008), creating variability in practice is
essential to learners’ exploratory activities during game play and produces flexible and adaptive
individuals who can create new solutions to solve typical motor problems. One of the advantages that
we have by organizing games in an implicit perspective with the goal of developing the winger is that
we allow that something new and unexpected solution can be created. The numbers that we
analyzed towards the balance of the opposition and the level of organization (concentration and
distance of the defensive line to the goal) both when the winger is assisting and scoring, have shown
us that in most of the situations the teams are balanced. We have observed a normal or high
concentration around the ball and a defensive line falling towards their own goal. This level of
defensive challenge sometimes can only be broken by some magic element that is taken from the
wingers’ own repertoire. This is valid for the assists and for the goals. Therefore, a low demand on
explicit instruction on how things should be done and a higher focus on this is the game, play it, can,
in fact, enhance the desired creative outcome. We aim to develop in the winger the same problem
solving capacity as the Mordillos’ Goalkeeper… but within the rules of the game.
b) Why not use the wingers’ references to create a check list of what to do, how to do it, when and
where, engage the players in its practice during training and evaluate their performance from
that process?
A large number of football players are educated to being told what to do. If-then rules are, in fact,
what the majority of the football coaches recognize has their main responsibility (no research data
on this matter, but an own intuition). Therefore, it’s quite normal that the players like the coaches
that are clear in the message of what, how and when to do a certain action. The circle is closed when
we acknowledge that our energy investment is this type of messages and information is higher than
for any other coaching tool. There is nothing wrong in this assumption. Our belief is that it’s not
complete and it shouldn’t be exclusive in our work. As we become more proficient in a certain task
our energy demands decrease. Research in neurobiology has shown that the activity pattern
associated to a task changes as the capacity increases, with less brain areas involved (Kahneman,
2012). This would justify if-then rules and the check list method. However, Kahneman (2012)
continues, the more intelligent individuals have less energy needs to solve the same problems (…) the
general law of minimum effort applies either as to cognitive as to physical engagement. This law
states that if there is various ways of achieving the same objective, people will take the less
demanding action. Then the question becomes more sophisticated. What kind of proficiency to we
want to develop in the winger (and in the players)? Where do we want the players to use less
energy? In the actions that they already know but, due to the unpredictability of the game, might not
be necessary? Or in the routine of reading a situation and, according to it, chose the most effective
(and economical from the energy point of view) action to solve the problem? We believe that players
like Pirlo (2013) to whom I think therefore I play and everything is about geometry, an approach such
as ours would be the most effective.

39

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

When it comes to our second objective for this report is important to refer that it’s very difficult to
draw the line from what is explicit and implicit in terms of coaching input. Even in the situation that
we put ourselves into: we are organizing games so that we can get what we want from it without
showing explicit evidence of it. How much of that process is implicit if the outcome that we want
from our game is somehow pre-defined? The players can learn in an implicit way (hopefully with A-A!
moments), but the object of learning is manipulated beforehand. Are we organizing a game with
explicit pre-defined outcomes to be learned in an implicit way? 1) We want the winger to move into
mellomrom and take advantage of that space when it’s large enough for him to assist to goal – an
explicit input; 2) we organize a game where that situation has a higher probability to happen – an
explicit input; 3) the inside cut actually happens often during the conditioned game – implicit
learning; 4) The movement to use mellomrom becomes automatic and a playing habit – job done?
The second challenge of translating the numbers to the training ground in a game centered approach
is that, once our input has an implicit nature we have to be persistent and consistent in its pursue
over time. This resilience is essential for two main reasons: a) because the outcome of the game
might not be coincident to the outcome that we predicted; b) because the outcome is not
immediate. The games are not exclusive from its starting objectives. There are other capacities that
are developed alongside the ones – we expect – could become more frequent. The situation might
occur that the frequency of the actions that the game enhances is different from the planned ones.
It’s important to recognize when this happens and readjust the constraints of the game. We have to
be both flexible and humble through this process. Flexible enough to change, adapt and adjust, and
humble to recognize our mistakes. We will fail a certain amount of times until we get the most
approximated version to realize our intentions. The interesting part of coaching is once you get it you
have to adjust it again, as the only constant in the game is the change itself. That said, it’s important
to underline that some of the game constraints that we suggest are not “tested” yet. Even the ones
that are more or less usual in our practice might not achieve the desired outcomes in some
situations. The matrix of games that we suggest is, therefore, just the beginning.
The practice delivery that includes the games in our matrix should also consider that there are
variables that can be added and that were not object of our planning. Training delivery variables like
the games placement in the session (Del 1? Del 2? Hoveddel?), sequence of progressions and training
elements such as the types of energy production that the coach is aiming to are some of the
examples. The variables that we manipulated can, therefore, be adjusted to the intentions of each
coach. The pitch dimensions and the number of players can have a big impact on the energy
production processes, for example. A couple of meters added to the width or length can produce
significant different outcomes. The numbers and the pitch dimensions that we have defined for each
game were focused almost exclusively on the tactical technical outcomes.
In Rosenborg BK, the game centered approach is not something new. Nils Arne Eggens’ methodology
was strongly based in game play. Although the session themes had a technical nature, the games
were organized in a similar way that we suggest that some of the games in our matrix are organized
(particularly the games with side corridors and extra players)12. However, what we provide with our
matrix is a fundament more around why that about what. The main focus is more on why do we
organize the games the way that we do, with the constraints that we create, and less on what games
do we do. The variability is present is both cases, but the propensity principle13 is more present on
the first than in the second.

40

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

B) Difficulties, challenges and limitations
In our problem definition we anticipated two main challenges: a) how could we control (and
evaluate) the impact of the game constraints on the development of the players; and b) how could
we decrease the high level of retroaction - time between our input and the desired outcome (the
impact of the game constraints is not as immediate as the direct instruction and feedback). We have
no answer to such challenges. However, the level of reflection provided by our work on the matrixes
can enhance the answer to such challenges. When such games are delivered in training we can have
a clearer idea on its efficiency, but we will only see the big picture when we use such a training
approach over time. Then, the possible adjustments and (re)adaptations of each game will improve
its utility and contribute for a better assessment of the development of the players and particularly
the ones who perform the role of the winger.
Some of the challenges that we can suggest for the future are positioned in two different levels:
analytical and practical. The games that were created could benefit with a process of correlative
analysis of the information: what are the differences in each phase according to the winger
intentions (scoring and assist)? What are the similarities? How is the analyzed game situations
created? What is happening for those structural distances and positioning to occur? Which
interdependent relations are created (is the mellomrom 10m when the winger is assisting because
the striker had a diagonal movement?)? The analyzed situations are isolated from these elements.
With information about what happens before or after each action from the winger we could take the
step further of designing games and exercises that deal with a higher complexity due to the players’
interactions variable. On the practical level an interesting challenge would be how do we articulate
the development of the role of the winger with other specific roles’ development? How much do we
focus on the game organization particularly for wingers, when the teams’ playing style is the most
important aspect to prioritize? How can we achieve such balance? This last challenge can also be
understood as one of the limitations of our matrix. It refers exclusively to the wingers or is it attached
to the reference attributes? Some of the attributes of the winger are similar to the ones of a full-back
or to an offensive midfielder. Can the games be used to serve the reference attributes,
independently from the role?
At which level these games should be introduced? Which progressions should be used? Is it
important that the role of the winger is developed in early ages? If we want to develop a winger that
is playing in Tippeliga can we use the same references? The number of questions can be multiplied
by how much curiosity and interest we have in this theme. Is the main limitation of this study the
higher number of questions it raises than the answers it provides?

41

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

VII.

2014-2015

Conclusion

A) The report End Product
Changing is difficult. Particularly in the situations when we tasted some success by doing what we
have always have done. When it comes to coaching, this change has an extra challenge not only
because we experience the unknown, but also because we have no guarantees that what we are
changing is going to makes us better and, more particularly, to have a positive influence our results.
The consequence of changing is drawn every weekend in 90 minutes. As we presented in the
conceptual framework chapter, the conventional way of coaching engages mostly in an explicit
perspective, with rigid recommendations about how everything should be done and what exactly
should happen… from the technical demands to the tactical outcomes. It’s not our intention, neither
from our report, to affirm that this is wrong, but to state instead that it’s not all completely right.
What we try to show is that there is other way – and with more impact on learning – that should not
only be acknowledged, but actually used. During this UEFA A course we had the chance to listen to
education experts such as Lars Tore Ronglan stating that we should use different ways to reach our
players and to maximize learning. It was also very clear along the course that we should use mostly
the game and playing situations to influence our players. The amount of practical sessions that we
engage into is a good example of that. Still, the demands that we all have had during those practical
sessions were underlined exclusively by an explicit approach to learning. Situations as stopping the
play, directive instruction or questioning about the solutions that we already had were the most
incentivized and rewarded type of coaching. What we attempt to achieve with these matrixes that
are the end product of our work is to present an alternative way of approaching the practice. We can
influence the players’ development and the team way of playing just by manipulating the variables of
the exercises and games and by creating specific constraints. The number of players or of specific
actions, the pitch dimensions and its geometry, technical constraints or rules and scoring are
elements of the games and exercises organization that can take out for the training the situations
that we need to see more often.
A part of the games that we suggest are recognizable for some coaches and new to others, and we
don’t presume that we have created something really original in this task. What we think that is
consistent is that we managed to connect intentions into a product and pre-defined objectives to a
way to realize them on the pitch. Just as we all coaches do in our session planning. A large part of the
rules, conditions and constraints of the games that are suggested have been part of previous sessions
in different teams, for different levels of competition and various age groups (with the adjusted level
of complexity). Some of them work really good, some of them don’t. Some of them are easy to
recognize by the players, some of them take some time. It’s certain that the winger as not been the
object of such conditions and constraints. Usually, such games manipulation is used to achieve a
certain playing style or a way to interpret a moment or phase of the game. Yet, we have no reason
not to trust how effective it can be.
We are not sure of how much the coaches are going to find our matrix a good working tool. Even so,
we design it for them. One of our intrinsic goals in this report was to have a contribution for the
coaches’ practice. We believe that we were able to create a consistent tool, with fundament and a
theoretic background. It has, of course, its limitations and it can be improved. The fact that it will at
least reach the UEFA A coaching license candidates is a guarantee that the matrix will be better from
the moment that will be under their scrutiny. Critical minds improve the quality of any process or end
product.

42

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

B) Personal reflection
It was challenging to write a report with this nature in a second language. Although the use of the
English language in day-to-day work, it’s still difficult to express fluently. It’s an extra challenge for
the Norwegian readers of this report, to who, of course, will be required an extra effort. The
flexibility shown by NFF and the coach-educators team in this matter is something to deeply
appreciate. Therefore, in some occasions it’s possible that the meaning or the shared ideas can be
misunderstood or difficult to understand. It’s more probable that the cause of such situation is on
behind the hands of its writer that in the perception of its reader. The lack of control of the English
language semantic or correct sentence construction and extended vocabulary is not as vast as
desired. The trap of using some “jargonism” was considered, even though the some of the
terminology was strictly necessary.
The second point of this personal reflection is the lesson about ambition and efficiency. Those two
attributes might not walk hand-to-hand as often as we desire. We started this report with a diverse
set of ideas to explore and various points of interest. The information available by TFS had set a high
standard for a research-oriented report and we intended to set high expectations to ourselves. Many
study points were dropped in the process. We intended to analyze the different types of wingers,
their relation with different formations. It was also our initial idea to study the wingers in the four
moments of the game and we only approached the offensive moment. It would be interesting to
approach also how we can develop the winger in all the training dimensions. The less positive
outcome of our approach narrowing was that we were not able neither to relate our matrix with the
Rosenborg playing style and the wingers in its 1-4-3-3 formation, neither to relate our study with the
youth development. Those two specific angles would play a leading contribution to the current
professional development scenario. Still, we had before the feeling that such report would provide
more future questions and motivate a sharper curiosity than provide particular answers. Those two
angles of approach will have a solid ground to stand on when we decide to engage its study.
We stated before that is important to close the gap between what science knows and what we do in
football. In education and learning there are space and time for different approaches and styles. The
most important message from our report is to show that everything should be considered and that
better decisions – on an off the field – are drawn with more and better information, independently
from the source (conscious or nonconscious). The new advancements in learning theory, supported
by neurobiology, neuroscience, educational sciences and psychology can and should challenge the
conventional coaches’ practices on the training ground. We believe that we had a contribution in this
matter by engaging in a task like the one we presented.
Finally, it’s also important to reflect on the impact that such task as in our professional development.
The coaching community is mostly motivated to practical issues and to immediate outcomes. Still,
the level of critical reflection and analysis, the professional dedication and the collaborative coaching
networks have been feeding the knowledge around football training methodology and coaching
philosophies. The coaching courses have the mission of developing a collective sense of hunger for
knowledge and writing a report with this framework is an effective strategy. It takes time and energy
and has its challenges particularly for the ones that are no in the job in full-time. But at the end we all
share a feeling of accomplishment that would be difficult to feel in any other way.

43

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

VIII.
-

2014-2015

References

Araújo, D., Davids, K., & Hrstovski, R. (2006). The ecological dynamics of decision making in sport.
Psychology of Sport and Exercise, pp. 653-676.

-

Bergkamp, D. (2013). Stillness and Speed - My story. London: Simon & Schuster.

-

Castelo, J. (2003). Futebol - Actividades Físicas e Desportivas. Lisboa: Faculdade de Motricidade
Humana.

-

Chow, J., Davids, K., Button, C., Renshaw, I., Shuttlework, R., & Uehara, L. (2008). Nonlinear
Pedagogy: implications for teaching games for understanding. TGfU: Simply Good Pedagogy:
Understanding a Complex Change, p. University of British Columbia.

-

Chow, J., Davids, K., Button, C., Shuttleworth, R., Renshaw, R., & Araújo, D. (2006, October). Nonlinear pedagogy: a constraints-led framework to understand emergence of game play and skills.
Nonlinear Dynamics, Psychology and Life Sciences, pp. 74-104.

-

Damásio, A. (1994). O Erro de Descartes. Portugal: Europa-América.

-

Eggen, N. A. (1999). Godfoten - Samhandling, veien til suksess. Oslo: Aschehoug & Co.

-

Griffin, L., & Butler, J. (2005). Teaching Games for Understanding: Theory, research and practice.
Champagin IL: Human Kinetics.

-

Guilherme Oliveira, J. (2014). Periodizacao Táctica: Pressupostos e Fundamentos. Brazil.

-

Hertz, N. (2013). Eyes Wide Open - How to make smart decisions in a confusing world. London:
William Collins.

-

Jackson, R. C., & Farrow, D. (2005). Implicit perceptual training: how, when and why. Human
Movement Science, pp. 308-325.

-

Kahneman, D. (2012). Pensar, Depressa e Devagar. Lisboa: Círculo de Leitores.

-

Lourenco, L. (2010). Mourinho - A Descoberta Guiada. Lisboa: Prime Books.

-

Magill, R. (1993). Augmented feedback in skill acquisition. In R. Singer, M. Murphey, L. Tennant,
& (eds), Handbook of Research on Sport Psychology (pp. 193-212). New York: Macmillan.

-

Pink, D. (2009). Drive: A surpreendente verdade sobre aquilo que nos motiva. Alfragide: Estrela
Polar.

-

Pirlo, A., & Alciato, A. (2013). I think therefore I play. UK: BackPage Press.

44

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

-

2014-2015

Reber, A. (1993). Implicit Learning and Tacit Knowledge: An essay on the cognitive unconscious.
New York: Oxford University Press.

-

Taylor, E. W. (2001, May-June Vol. 20, No. 3). Transformative learning theory: a neurobiological
perspective of the role of emotions and unconscious ways of knowing. International Journal of
Lifelong Education, pp. 218-236.

-

Toppfotballsenter, N. (2014). Kompetansekrav i Rolle.

-

Toppfotballsenter, N. (2014). Kvalitetskrav i spillet .

-

Williams, A., & Hodges, N. (2005). Practice, instruction and skill acquisition in soccer: challenging
tradition. Journal of Sport Sciences, pp. 237-650.

-

http://blogs.ubc.ca/cognophilia/. (n.d.). http://blogs.ubc.ca/cognophilia/. Retrieved January 26,
2015, from http://blogs.ubc.ca/cognophilia/

-

Wikipedia.

(2014).

Wikipedia.

Retrieved

November

20,

2014,

http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maxwell's_demon

45

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

from

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

2014-2015

Endnotes
1

The first time I read this statement was on a college wall when I was taking part of a Manchester United
Soccer School Player Development Course (MUSS PDC) in the summer of 2013. Sir Alex Ferguson (or a creative
MUSS marketing department) is the author of such statement.
2

(Wikipedia, 2014) In the philosophy of thermal and statistical physics, Maxwell's demon is a thought
experiment created by the physicist James Clerk Maxwell to "show that the Second Law of Thermodynamics has
only a statistical certainty".[1] It demonstrates Maxwell's point by hypothetically describing how to violate the
Second Law: a container of gas molecules at equilibrium is divided into two parts by an insulated wall, with a
door that can be opened and closed by what came to be called "Maxwell's demon". The demon opens the door
to allow only the faster than average molecules to flow through to a favored side of the chamber, and only the
slower than average molecules to the other side, causing the favored side to gradually heat up while the other
side cools down, thus decreasing entropy.
3

(Hertz, 2013) The delude of information is a term used by the author to describe how people are drowning in
information: For this is the age of data deluge (…) our stone-age bodies can’t cope with this modern-day deluge.
Evolution is slow; the deluge has come fast. Confronted with data – some dodgy, some not – our hearts beat
faster, our breath becomes more shallow, we sweat: the deluge makes our body shift into crisis mode. (p.5-6)
4

(Kahneman, 2012) The author explores the dichotomy of two modes of thought (System 1 and System 2) and
its utility in the decision making process.
5

Adapted thought from the original quote: “If we want to strengthen our companies, elevate our lives, and
improve the world, we need to close the gap between what science knows, and what business does.”
6

SL Benfica’s Head Coach Jorge Jesus was the first one I have heard to suggest the set pieces as the fifth
moment of the game.
7

(Toppfotballsenter, Kvalitetskrav i spillet , 2014) A large amount of data in this paperwork is provided by
reports, study cases or data collection from this research center.
8

(Toppfotballsenter, Kompetansekrav i Rolle, 2014) This report includes the analysis of the different positions
on the pitch and the success criteria defined from the World Cup 2014 observation.
9

Dr. Fergus Connolly is a Sports Performance Consultant who has worked in elite team sports from Premiership
football and International Rugby, to the NFL and NBA. He has a PhD in Computer Optimization and specializes
in the development of unique effective monitoring, training and regeneration approaches to improving results
in team sport. He gave a lecture at the UK Sport and Exercise Medicine Conference (now the British Association
of Sport and Exercise Medicine) in 2011 to which we will refer to in a couple of occasions (we make reference
to this source in the bibliography chapter).
10

The term repetition used here in the Bernsteinian sense, i.e. learners should not be required to repeat an
identical movement pattern from situation to situation, but instead should be encouraged to repeatedly
construct subtly differing, successful solutions to movement problems during learning (Chow, 2008).
11

(Toppfotballsenter, Kompetansekrav i Rolle, 2014) This report includes the analysis of the different positions
on the pitch and the success criteria defined from the World Cup 2014 observation.
12

(Eggen, 1999) The chapter På tur med godfoten is illustrative of this aspect.

13

(Guilherme Oliveira, 2014) The propensity principle has the objective of creating practice contexts where the
density of the principles that should be experienced are present regularly in training so that the game model
can emerge within the team.

46

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

THE ROLE OF THE WINGER – FROM THE NUMBERS TO THE TRAINING GROUND

Annex
Annex 1 – Wingers’ game book
Annex 2 – Toppfotbalsenteret Kompetansekrav i Rolle rapport
Annex 3 – Football pitch dimension (reference to the pitch dimensions)

47

HUGO CARLOS PEREIRA – WRITTEN REPORT, UEFA A LICENCE AT THE NORWEGIAN FOOTBALL FEDERATION

2014-2015

